---
layout: post
title: "Academia Goes Facebook? The Potential of Social Network Sites in the Scholarly Realm"
modified_date: 2 March 2014
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8_7
authors:
 - name:  Michael Nentwich
   orcid: 0000-0003-2269-0076
 - name:  René König
category: tools
abstract: |
 Social network sites (SNS) have not only become a fundamental part of the Web,
 but also increasingly offer novel communicative and networking possibilities
 for academia. Following a short presentation of the typical functions of
  (science-specific) SNS, we firstly present the state of knowledge regarding
  academic usage practices, both in general purpose SNS and in science-specific
  SNS. Secondly, we assess potential impacts by addressing identified key
  issues such as privacy, the role of pseudonymity, and the specific form of
  informal communication in question. In particular, we focus on the issue of
  network effects and the challenge of multiple channels, which presents itself
  as a major hurdle for an effective implementation of SNS in academia. Despite
  hese difficulties, we come to the conclusion that SNS are, in principle,
  functional for scholarly communication and that they have serious potential
  within academia.
---

> This network is the seat of scientific opinion which is not held by
any single human brain, but which is split into thousands of different
fragments … each of whom endorses the other´s opinion at second hand, by
relying on the consensual chains which link him to all the others
through a sequence of overlapping neighborhoods.
<small>Michael Polanyi (1962) in the Republic of Science</small>

## Introduction

Starting approximately around the year 2000, a growing number of social
network sites (SNS) began populating the Internet, offering novel
communicative possibilities; above all they link-up its members and map
their offline networks. As this seemed to offer an attractive potential
for academic communication as well, from the mid-2000s onwards, with a
certain peak in 2007/2008, science-specific SNS also entered the market,
both disciplinary-focused ones (like *AtmosPeer* or *Edumeres*) and more
general examples with increasingly large numbers of members (like
*ResearchGate*, *Mendeley*, *Academia.edu*). Most SNS provide a central
web-based platform which cannot itself be modified by users. Some
services give more options for thia, for example *Ning*, which allows
for the design of SNS for specific needs within the framework of the
software. *Vivo*, a US-based science-specific SNS, offers even more
flexibility as its software is open source and can be hosted on local
servers.

Due to their manifold functions and complexity, various definitions
exist of what a SNS constitutes, e.g. [@mack_reaching_2007;
@richter_social_2007; @schmidt_neue_2009; @boyd_social_2007;
@beer_social_2008; @fuchs_social_2009]. As SNS
have multiple functions, it is difficult to impose a selective
definition of these; hence, it depends on the specific definition as to
whether a platform will be here counted as a SNS. Following Schmidt
(2009), we base our definition for this chapter on the possibility of
setting up a sophisticated personal ‘profile’ with information about
oneself, such as interests and activities, within a digital space that
can usually only be reached after registration. Starting from this
profile, users initiate and entertain social relationships with others,
making them explicit through interlinking; the members interact and
navigate on the platform, which is basically formed by these networks of
‘contacts’. Focusing on the central function of profiles enables us to
distinguish SNS from other services: Networking alone is also a
characteristic of other platforms that are typically not seen as SNS
such as the voice-over-IP service *Skype* or the microblogging service
*Twitter*. As for the latter, the profiles are minimalist and the
timeline of messages, not the profile, is at the center of the platform
(see chapter 06, Puschmann: (Micro)blogging Science? Notes on Potentials
and Constraints of New Forms of Scholarly Communication). Similarly,
online reference management platforms are organized around publications
(see chapter 08, Fenner: Reference Management). We observe, however,
that also in these other services increasingly SNS-like functions are
added, so that the distinction is dynamic and not clear-cut.

Even among the SNS in the narrow sense, there are many differences, in
particular when it comes to the available communication tools or how
users can configure their profiles. Two core functions are always
present: *identity management* and *contact management* [@richter_social_2007]. The profiles map—more or less in the public domain—the
contacts of a person and enable access to further members on various
paths, i.e. networking.

As the technical functionality and target groups vary, we may
distinguish different types of SNS: There are variations according to
the *intended usage forms*. In some SNS, private purposes prevail, in
others professional fields of application dominate; furthermore, in
others private and professional use overlap. *Requirements for access*
also vary: some are open, that is, they only require a simple
registration which, in principle, can be done by all Internet users
[@richter_funktionen_2008]. This is the case with many popular SNS. Other
platforms offer limited free access, but charge user fees for the full
service. However, most platforms are free of charge in order to attract
a sufficient audience and paying advertisers (see section “Assessing the
Potential Future and Impacts of SNS in Academia” for a discussion of the
problems related to such business models). Finally, there are
specialized networks that are open only for certain communities, such as
a company or research group. The *available communication forms* vary
according to different needs. For example, to nudge someone online is
used in a private context, whereas many professional networks offer
additional functions such as bibliographic searching (see section
“Typical Functions of SNS”).

In this chapter we discuss SNS only from the viewpoint of use in
academia, based on, but extending the analysis in our book Cyberscience
2.0 [@nentwich_cyberscience_2012, pp. 19–50]. Following a short overview on types
of SNS, their typical functions, academic potential, and observable user
practices, we focus on a few key issues that are essential for answering
our title question, namely whether academia will indeed “go Facebook”,
that is, whether future communication among scholars will take place
predominantly on these platforms, or even on one single dominant
platform. These issues include privacy, the role of pseudonymity, and
the specific form of informal communication in question. In particular,
we focus on the challenge of multiple channels, which presents itself as
a major hurdle for an effective implementation of SNS in academia.

## An Overview of Functions, Potential, and Usage Practices

### Typical Functions of SNS

Various functions and forms of communication are typical for SNS, though
not all of them are necessarily available in each individual SNS.
Science-specific SNS in particular try to develop technologies which
meet the requirements of their particular audience.

1.  **Profiles:** User profiles are digital representations of users
    and as such the central nodes of SNS. Various kinds of information
    can be made available to other members in a pre-structured way, from
    contact information to tracking of user activities. In some SNS it
    is also possible to have specific profiles for organizations. Thus
    profiles are like enhanced calling cards of individuals,
    organizations, and groups. Some SNS experiment with special scores
    to automatically rate user activity on the basis of their activity
    in the SNS, thereby creating a potential metric for reputation (e.g.
    RG Score in *ResearchGate*, see Figure 1).
2.  **Communication:** The integration of multiple communication
    channels within one platform is a distinctive feature of SNS, as
    compared to various other web-based communication tools. Various
    tools are available in order to commu­nicate with other members:
    messaging, chatting, discussion forums/groups, microblogging,
    nudging, videoconferencing, etc.
3.  **Networking:** As networking is one of the basic functions of
    SNS, all sites offer various tools to promote it: contacts/friends,
    automated or manual propositions for further contacts, search
    functions (partly also automated), invitations, bookmarking of
    profiles, automatically generated requests to welcome new members or
    propose something or someone to them, and network presentation in
    various forms.
4.  **Directing attention:** The great variety of opportunities to
    communicate and network in SNS suggests further tools to establish
    the relevance of content and to direct the attention of its members
    towards particular items: current issues on start page, external
    notifications (via e-mail), and the “Like this” button/“Share-this”
    function. These data may be used in the future as indicators for
    relevance, discussed under the label of social search (e.g. [@biermann_facebook_2010]).
5.  **Groups:** All users can found thematic groups. By usually
    offering the following functions, groups enable the detection of and
    networking with members with similar interests and they provide a
    digital environment for discussion and collaboration: discussion
    forum, file upload, collaborative writing environments, tools to
    administer participants in events, selective access to groups,
    passive membership. Sometimes group-like options are labeled
    differently, e.g. “topics”/”projects” in ResearchGate.
6.  **Calendar:** Some SNS offer their users calendars in order to
    coordinate dates, plan, and market events of all kinds.
7.  **Literature-related functions:** Given the central position of
    publications in academia, science-specific SNS also offer a number
    of literature-related functions: searching for academic literature
    by giving access to other, external, mainly open-access databases,
    as well as internally in the publication lists and database entries
    of members; similar abstract search; compiling bibliographies; open
    access archive; various attention direction services like
    notifications, based on topicality, semantic relationships, “Have
    read” buttons, commenting or rating, “Share this” function, access
    statistics, and visualization of networks of co-authors.
8.  **Further services:** In addition to these functions, further
    specialized and target-group-specific services are offered: job
    exchange services, blogging, embedding of services of external
    providers via apps (thus creating interfaces between the SNS and
    other services), and advertisement.

Given this broad variety of functions, services, and tools provided by
SNS, one is tempted to consider SNS an umbrella for all kinds of
features that Cyberscience 2.0—or Science 2.0—offer to the current and
next generations of academics. From a technical point of view, this is a
viable assessment. However, this is only a vision which still needs to
be realized in practice, given some of the challenges addressed below.

## Potentials of SNS for Science and Research

Our systematic analysis of the potential for academic SNS use starts
with the four core areas of scientific activity [@nentwich_cyberscience_2003, pp. 24]
and reveals that SNS provide functions for all these areas, namely
Alexander Edmonds: knowledge production, processing and distribution, as well as
institutional settings. The various functions of directing attention may
be helpful in the process of acquiring information, particularly with
regard to literature. Shared data archives potentially help working
groups to administer their files. As the multiple possibilities for
communication are the core of each SNS, they are, at least from a
technical perspective, functional for academic communication as well.
Through the various channels, knowledge can be presented and offered for
academic discourse. The group functions may support collaboration.
However, SNS are not currently an adequate place for publication, even
though in principle documents may be published within the network, while
access to documents is hampered, as it is usually necessary to register
(which also hinders indexing the items in external search-engines). In
addition, there is no formalized peer-review process in any of the
observed SNS, thus the knowledge distributed via this channel will not
be reputable, and less relevant to many. Hence, publication within SNS
seem inappropriate at the moment. However, this could potentially change
if thorough peer-review mechanisms are established. In contrast, SNS may
be a valuable additional channel for pointing to texts that have been
published elsewhere. They provide a number of functions in that respect:
profiles, means of internal communication, tools to direct attention,
group functions, and literature-related services. SNS may also be used
as e-learning platforms and at the organizational level they are
potentially useful as a digital infrastructure. For example, SNS serve
as a dynamic list of “digital calling cards” and may help to set up
networks of scientists with similar interests as a pool of potential
cooperation and communication partners. The popular general-purpose SNS
such as *Facebook* appear especially suitable for public relations,
academic organizations such as research institutes, universities,
scholarly associations, and networks, as well as for individual
researchers.

In line with the multiple services SNS offer, different user practices
are conceivable. SNS could serve multilaterally as a discussion forum or
as a platform for exchanging information, similar to other web forums
and in particular e-mail list-servers. Furthermore, they may be used as
bilateral communication channels, asynchronously via webmail or
synchronously as chatting platforms. SNS may serve as platforms for
(micro-)blogging to exchange science-related or day-to-day information,
and for e-learning, and one can easily imagine more options for their
scholarly application. Thus we note that SNS seem to be functional for a
number of essential academic activities.

## Academic Usage Practices in SNS

As of yet, there are only very few, and mostly limited studies of how
academics actually use SNS in practice. Therefore, the following account
is based both on these few studies and the authors’ own experiences and
participatory observations over the last few years.

### The diffusion of SNS in academia and the intensity of usage

The number of members, mostly published by the SNS themselves, and their
growth rates is a first indication for the diffusion of SNS in the
academic world. *ResearchGate*, for example, had 150.000 members in
August 2008, 700.000 in December 2010, announced a million by May 2011,
and reached two million in September 2012. We observed similar growth in
other SNS, but the figures may not hold in practice, given their origin.
The member count, in any case, does not necessarily correlate with
actual use, because there certainly are some (partly) inactive accounts.
Therefore, more differentiated usage studies would be needed. Existing
studies provide only first insights into the diffusion of SNS among
scientists and students [@koch_onlinestudie_2009; @kleimann_studieren_2008;
@procter_if_2010; @bader_digitale_2012]: They generally show a rather
low active usage, although the diffusion appears partly higher among
young academics. The outcomes of such studies also vary depending on the
exact target group and design of the surveys. We may expect that the
proportion of SNS users among scientists will increase as the younger
generations move up in academia.

We observed the following types of activity levels and usage intensities
and propose to differentiate usage in future studies accordingly:

1.  *Me-too presence:* rudimentary profile; only occasional contacts and
    never, or only sporadically, become active—probably the most
    frequent case.
2.  *Digital calling card:* more detailed profile like a type of
    additional personal homepage; practically no further
    activity—probably the second most frequent case at the moment.
3.  *Passive networking:* searching the network in the beginning and
    thereafter in irregular intervals for other (previously known)
    members, reacting to automated suggestions to contact other users,
    sporadic communication with other members.
4.  *Active networking and communication:* being regularly online, using
    further services, such as publication search, and participating in
    group forums, actively searching for potential networking partners
    beyond those they already know.
5.  *Cyberentrepreneurship* [@nentwich_cyberscience_2003, pp. 175ff.]: not only active
    participants in the network, but also serving as moderators or
    animators of group forums, administering groups, are in charge of
    institutional profiles, giving feedback to the site
    developers—obviously the rarest form of participation of researchers
    in SNS.

These are certainly ideal types and in practice appear mixed. We
observed repeatedly the above usage types, but cannot offer results
regarding their precise empirical distribution. There may also be
activities which are not observable from an outside perspective, e.g.
private messaging. In any case we need to consider that the activity
levels and usage types vary considerably. Consequently, member counts do
not lead to insights into the vitality of a SNS. This is confirmed by
the study of Procter et al. (2010) on the scientific use of Web 2.0:
only 13 percent of the participants fall into the category “frequent
users”, 45 percent are “occasional users”, and 39 percent do not
actively use Web 2.0. A large qualitative study with 160 interviews and
focus group discussions with US researchers [@harley_assessing_2010] notes
that SNS are not widely used in academia, with some exceptions.

Despite impressive and growing member counts, we may nevertheless draw
the conclusion that SNS are not yet part of the academic mainstream.
Given the theoretical potential (see above) we hypothesize that the
trend will presumably continue in the future. On the question as to
whether scientific SNS may reach the tipping point, see the section “The
Hard Way to the Critical Mass”.

### Academic usage practices in science-specific SNS

Many academics have become members of multi-purpose SNS, such as
*Facebook*, *LinkedIn*, and *Xing*, not least because they are
widespread and accepted. Usage practices are heterogeneous because these
SNS are not particularly focused on academic users; among them we found
communication with colleagues, e-teaching, public relations of research
institutes, and self-marketing, as well as job exchange. While we have
analyzed those practices elsewhere in more depth [@nentwich_cyberscience_2012, pp.
38ff.] —- our main conclusion being that general SNS play a minor role in
the practice of research communication as of yet —- we focus in this
chapter on science-specific SNS.

We found the following main practices:

* *Communication and cooperation:* One specific strength of
  science-specific SNS could be their potential to support communication
  and cooperation among researchers. We did not observe, however, many
  efficient and successful working groups in these SNS as of yet (they
  may, however, exist, but are hidden from outsiders). A few
  self-experiments in our own area have been only modestly successful.
  They mainly failed because of a lack of potential cooperation partners
  inside the chosen SNS as we were not able to motivate all relevant
  colleagues to actively participate in that particular SNS. In contrast
  to the attraction of large general SNS, the rather young and small
  science-specific networks suffer from a lack of sufficient numbers of
  active users (see the section “The Hard Way to the Critical Mass”). In
  addition, we observed the following further obstacles: technical
  limitations, lacking experience of users, skepticism regarding file
  security, the need to firstly develop a common culture of online
  collaboration, and, finally and notably, the problem of multiple
  channels (see the section Multiple Channels, Information Overload and
  Filtering).

* *Public relations and self-marketing:* Because of their limited target
  group (mainly peers), these SNS are of limited use for public relations,
  as you can hardly reach larger groups outside of the science communities
  in question. In contrast, it is potentially easier to target workers in
  particular fields by means of the sophisticated mechanisms for
  networking that most SNS provide. Similarly to general SNS,
  self-marketing is also possible in science-specific SNS when focused on
  one’s peer group, for example, by drawing attention to one’s own
  publications. Based on our observations, this is currently probably the
  most widely used activity. There is already a very high coverage of
  publications in certain fields in SNS like *Mendeley* [@li_validating_2011;
  @bar-ilan_jasistmendeley_2012].

* *E-teaching:* We did not observe that science-specific SNS are
  frequently used in teaching. There are specific functions to support it,
  for instance in *research.iversity*, but there is not much known yet
  about their actual usage. Obviously, these professional networks do not
  seem particularly attractive to students, in contrast to *Facebook* and
  other general SNS, because they fit less well with their day-to-day
  needs and more with the workaday life of a scientist. Hence, students
  are hardly reachable via this channel, except in experimental settings.
  However, certain effective student-orientated platforms exist, for
  example *Carnets2 Descartes* at Paris Descartes University. In any case,
  SNS may turn out being a good platform for exchange among teaching
  scientists when they prepare their courses.

* *Job exchange:* These services have the advantage of having a
  preselected target group in science-specific SNS as opposed to general
  ones. In September 2012, for example, we found more than 1.000 job
  offers on *ResearchGate*, mainly from biomedical enterprises, and some
  130 on *Academia.edu*. The extent to which these job exchanges are
  actually used is unknown to us.

### Assessing the Potential Future and Impacts of SNS in Academia

Will ever more and, perhaps at some point, most academics use SNS as
they use e-mail today? What consequences may this have? In order to
answer these questions, we will focus on the following puzzles: How
important are network effects and will science-specific SNS reach the
tipping point (section “The Hard Way to the Critical Mass”)? What role
will the very big players play in that game (section “The Hyper-Critical
Mass: Too Big to Fail?”)? Is the necessity to observe multiple channels
in parallel possibly dysfunctional for science communication and will
the trend towards multi-functionality and one-stop-services generate the
necessary network effects (section “Multiple Channels, Information
Overload and Filtering”)? And finally (section “social issues): What
potential do SNS have for informal communication among academics, and
with what effects? What roles do identity, pseudonymity, and anonymity
play in scientific SNS? Which privacy-related conflicts occur?

## The Hard Way to the Critical Mass

Unlike many other Internet technologies, SNS necessarily require a
certain critical mass of active users to be functional. This leaves them
in a dilemma: They are only attractive with users, but users only come
when they are attractive. SNS providers use different strategies to
overcome this issue. Of course, they try to develop an infrastructure
which is at least *potentially* useful once their target group has
populated the platform. This might attract a number of early adopters
who will eventually lure further users until a critical mass has been
reached. While this strategy has worked for many Internet start-ups, it
is not easily applicable for SNS. The problem here is that new members
will only understand the early adopters’ attraction once they have built
up their own networks within the platform. Therefore, the effective
usage of SNS requires a critical mass of users both on a global and also
on an individual level. Even a highly populated platform can be
dysfunctional for a single user if it does not represent people from his
individual network or potentially relevant users for future
interactions. Building individual networks takes time and effort, while
the possible benefits of such an investment are not immediately clear to
new users. This might be one of the reasons for the hesitant scholarly
usage of SNS.

Another strategy to reach a critical mass can be to minimize the “mass”
by addressing a smaller and thus easier reachable target group.
*Facebook* can be seen as a successful example here, as it first aimed
only at the Ivy League universities before it was opened up for larger
audiences. *Carnets2 Descartes* is a popular example from the academic
realm, focusing on students at the Descartes University in Paris.
Although we are not aware of plans to reach beyond this circle, this
example shows how a platform can become relevant for a limited audience.
Another possible limitation for the academic realm is of course the
focus on specific disciplines or even smaller thematic or organizational
entities, as it is done by a number of academic SNS. However, smaller
target groups can hardly be seen as a general way to success. For
example, once the market leader of SNS in Germany, ''StudiVZ ''is now
struggling with vast numbers of users migrating to *Facebook*. One
reason for this is probably that it failed to address an international
audience—in contrast to its main competitor.

Finally, a critical mass of scholars using SNS might be achieved by
creating extrinsic incentives. Indirectly, this could be done with
altmetrics which extend academic impact assessment beyond the
established scientometrics by tracing SNS activities. If relevant
institutions acknowledge scholarly engagement on these platforms via
such measurements, it would certainly increase the participation of
academics in SNS. Directly, incentives could be created by faculties and
universities themselves: To a large extent, it is in their hands as to
which software should be used for the various researching and teaching
activities.

Evidently, such incentives need to be designed carefully and can easily
result in unwanted consequences. For instance, altmetrics might get
manipulated by “buying” friends, comments, recommendations, etc. There
are already numerous companies offering such services for commercial
users, which could in principle be used for academic users as well.
Also, scholars or students could revolt against being pushed into SNS by
their organizations. In particular, *Facebook* with its privacy issues
seems problematic here. Indeed, there were reports on students rejecting
approaches on *Facebook* from their university libraries due to privacy
concerns [@connell_academic_2008; @mendez_friend_2009]. This points us to another
issue: While SNS are undoubtedly dysfunctional without a critical mass,
the mass itself can become problematic when it reaches a certain size.

## The Hyper-Critical Mass: Too Big to Fail?

Often *Facebook* is compared to nations or even whole continents in
order to illustrate its massive size. Indeed, the platform does not only
outnumber most countries´ populations, but also has an enormous economic
power and impact on various realms of modern societies. Therefore, one
could argue that *Facebook* has not just reached the critical mass to
survive, but a hyper-critical mass, overpowering its competitors. While
the concentration of users in principle serves the functionality of a
SNS and thereby also its users, the power which is accumulated in this
way has to be critically observed. On a general level, this has been
already a subject of intensive public as well as academic debates which
we cannot discuss here in detail. The main concern seems to be
privacy-related: *Facebook* gathers vast amount of data about personal
lives and gives its users only very opaque options to control what can
be seen by others, including external companies which may have access to
this data. This is also a major obstacle for the academic usage of
*Facebook*. On the one hand, the technical hurdle for the academic usage
of *Facebook* is very low for users who already apply the platform for
their private lives on a daily basis. On the other hand, this may be
exactly what holds them back if they do not wish to blend their
professional and their private lives in this way. At the same time, some
researchers are reluctant to disseminate work in progress as they feel
it is imperfect or because they fear competitiveness [@harley_assessing_2010, pp. 13].
Although this is a general issue of academic social media
usage, it is particularly pressing when a company’s business model
depends on the exploitation of user data as in the case of *Facebook* or
*Google*.

Moreover, once a SNS has reached a hyper-critical mass, it creates new
dependencies, as it works like a black hole: The bigger it gets, the
more people are drawn to it, the more content is produced, and so on.
Therefore, it becomes increasingly difficult to separate from it. A lot
of time has been invested in learning to operate the platform, building
networks, discussing issues, editing profiles, creating publication
lists, tagging items, etc. Most of this data and effort cannot easily be
extracted and imported into another platform, so the hurdle to leave it
becomes higher and higher, especially if it is still frequently used by
other relevant communication partners. Then it may be (perceived as a)
significant part of an individual’s or organization’s social capital,
leading to low mobility of users from social network sites with a
hyper-critical mass, creating a self-stabilizing force in turn. This
partially explains the “seductive power” [@oosthuyzen_seductive_2012] of such
sites, making users stay even if they do not agree with its policies or
are unsatisfied with its services. At the same time, it is very
difficult for alternative SNS providers to compete with this accumulated
power which also attracts third-party services like apps.

So, although the functionality of a SNS is increased when it
concentrates a vast number of users, such a monopoly-like market
situation comes at a price. In the academic context, this is
particularly troubling when the SNS is outside the influence of the
academic realm. Commercial providers like *Facebook* do not only have a
questionable privacy policy, they also hardly let users participate in
the platform design—especially when it comes to such specific needs as
scientific ones. Science-specific SNS are more likely to take this into
account but they are still mostly in the hand of companies who
ultimately decide about the platform’s design, policy, and existence.
The worst case scenario is, of course, that a service is shut down
because it is not profitable or does not fit anymore to a company’s
strategy. This is not just a hypothetical scenario: For instance, users
of the blogging and networking platform *Posterous* could only
helplessly witness as the company was acquired by its competitor
*Twitter*, apparently just to let it die slowly and benefit from its
staff’s competence. In principle, this dependency also applies to
non-commercial developers, although they are less driven by the needs of
paying clients. They also might change their business model, as it was
done in the case of *Couchsurfing* or *StudiVZ*, both SNS which started
as non-profits but were later commercialized. Therefore, academic
institutions should choose a platform carefully if they plan for a
sustainable organized engagement. This may be challenging as a platform
with a hyper-critical mass can be tempting, especially because of the
difficulties in reaching a critical mass on competing platforms.

## Multiple Channels, Information Overload and Filtering

The current status of SNS in the scholarly realm is confusing: As
pointed out above, there is no clear market leader with a sufficient
critical mass of active scientists yet. Therefore, interested scholars
are confronted with multiple potential platforms that they can choose
from. Establishing and maintaining various SNS profiles is a
time-consuming task, so most academics will rather select only one or a
few than be active on various platforms at the same time. This means
that the potential scholarly SNS users are spread over numerous
services, instead of concentrating on one or two. At the same time, the
present “cyberscientists 2.0” who actually use various platforms
simultaneously have to face the challenges of these multiple channels:
Maintaining their presences already becomes a time-consuming task under
these circumstances. Partly, interoperability across different platforms
via APIs solves this problem. For example, a number of social media
tools allow the sending of one status update to several platforms. Yet
such options are still very limited and not supported by all SNS. Due to
the competition between the providers, it is unlikely that this will
change fundamentally soon. Apart from maintaining multiple profiles,
cyberscientists 2.0 also need to observe diverse channels. Even within
one platform this can be a confusing task: Communication takes place in
many virtual locations, e.g. via messaging, chatting, group
conversations, or commenting. So far, SNS hardly provide options to
effectively organize this stream of information, especially when it
comes to archiving and retrieving older bits of communication. At the
same time, the ongoing news stream via multiple channels can easily
overwhelm SNS users, resulting in an information overload. Although the
fear of such an information overload was already expressed decades ago
[@toffler_future_1970], some Internet critiques regard this as a pressing issue
of the fragmented and hyperlinked structure of the WWW, possibly
swamping our neuronal capacities and hindering deeper and coherent
thoughts [@carr_shallows_2010; @schirrmacher_payback_2009; @spitzer_digitale_2012].
Moreover, we need to remember that SNS only add up to the already existing
communication channels—from other social media platforms to e-mail,
telephone, and many more.

Partly, users will cope with the challenge of information overload by
developing specific strategies. For example, they may limit their
practices to intentional active usage, which is less likely to lead to
endless distraction through non-targeted passive usage. One could also
argue in favor of SNS that one of the main ideas of these services is an
effective information selection by people who we trust. However, as soon
as one´s digital social network reaches a certain size, it becomes
extremely time-consuming if not impossible to follow it. Then additional
filter mechanisms are needed. In sophisticated platforms these are
organized in the background through algorithms hidden from the user.
While this creates additional opacity, the selection of information
through peers within SNS *per se* leads to an individual bias depending
on one’s networks. The common argument in favor of this novel way of
personalized gatekeeping is that it is more likely to deliver content
which is relevant to the user. Critiques, however, fear it will lead us
into a distorted “filter bubble” [@pariser_filter_2011], lacking diversity and
serendipity. In the first place, this is a concern for the public
sphere. Yet we may also wonder what impact these new filter mechanisms
will have upon the academic realm. Will this work against the general
tendency of blurring (disciplinary) boundaries in the context of fluid
digital networks? Might this re-define scholarly relevance and
visibility to a certain extent? Will new metrics such as
*ResearchGate*’s RG Score (see Figure 1 below) one day become serious
competition for established scientometrics? On the one hand, the current
low penetration of SNS into the academic sector does not make these
questions appear very urgent. On the other hand, these questions are
highly relevant to those scholars who already use the emerging
platforms. They change the way scientists interact and exchange
information. Since this differs according to the individual digital
networks and the phenomenon has not yet fulfilled its whole potential,
one can hardly draw broader conclusions on the exact impact of these
development at this point.

![**Figure 1**. Excerpt of an RG Score (screenshot).](/images/academia_goes_facebook.png)

## Social Issues

-   **Informal Academic Communication 2.0**. By offering multiple
    electronic paths to reach and chat with members of the research
    community, SNS increase the possibility and likelihood of informal
    communication. Fully-fledged Cyberscience 2.0—or Science 2.0—would
    certainly look different to today’s interim state-of-affairs. It may
    be characterized by massive, ubiquitous, possibly transdisciplinary
    micro-communication among academics, and with interested lay
    observers [@nentwich_cyberscience_2012, pp. 200f.]. This is already
    happening in certain niches with very active academic
    cyberentrepreneurs, but it is anything but the norm as of yet. It
    will be interesting to see what impact this may have on the
    structure of the science system as it becomes more common. We may
    also ask whether SNS may contribute to formalize the informal by
    making social networks of researchers — the so-called “invisible
    colleges” [@crane_invisible_1972] — more transparent. Depending on factors like
    privacy settings and the chosen communication channels, SNS partly
    reveal who is connected to whom and how closely.
-   **The Ambiguous Roles of Identity, Pseudonymity and Anonymity**.
    With regard to private use of SNS, pseudonymity instead of having
    a profile with one’s real identity is frequently practiced, though
    discouraged. Thus it is possible to differentiate between different
    roles. Anonymous accounts are usually not possible. By contrast, in
    professional SNS which often also serve as public calling card
    directories, pseudonymity would be counter-productive because the
    users need to get in touch with “real” people. Similarly,
    pseudonymity is mostly dysfunctional in academia. Science
    communication rests on the premise that you communicate, whatever
    the medium, with actual persons in order to be able to cooperate or
    co-author. In other words, merits need to be attributable:
    researchers definitely expect that behind a profile in a SNS is
    another researcher who has actually written the papers listed in the
    publications attached to the profile. Some SNS try to guarantee this
    by verifying the identity on registration (e.g. *BestThinking*). In
    most cases, researchers also desire to be recognized in order to
    better establish themselves and increase their reputation. However,
    there are two cases where temporal or functional anonymity is in the
    interest of academia: In many fields, the peer-review process is
    usually double-blind. We may conceive that also the various rating
    systems within SNS, most of which are not anonymous as of yet, may
    be implemented in a way that allows anonymous rating. The other case
    is when it comes to testing new ideas in a creative forum space or
    during collective brainstorming. Here it may fuel creativity when
    the relation between callow thoughts and the originator would not be
    registered permanently in a written archive. For many cases, it
    seems desirable to create several personal “micro-publics” which may
    overlap, but “allow for distinct foci” [@barbour_academic_2012],
    e.g. in order to address different fields and audiences, such as
    peers and students.
-   **Is Privacy an Issue in SNS?** Mixing private and professional
    roles is an obvious problem in general SNS (like *Facebook*) which
    almost inevitably blend both identities. This is less so in
    science-specific SNS where the related privacy conflicts are
    attenuated: We observed that most researchers reveal only their
    professional identity here. This is usually supported by the set of
    information one is supposed to enter when setting up one’s profile:
    the forms ask for biographical information relevant to academia and
    less for private facts such as relationship status. Note, however,
    that even *ResearchGate* asks for pet books and hobbies, but only
    receives answers from a few according to our observations. In any
    case, people using SNS leave their digital marks and traces, and so
    do researchers. There is currently an intense discussion about
    privacy concerns in the general SNS. At least some of researchers’
    reluctance to join SNS may be explained by fear of losing control
    over their privacy. In science-specific SNS, the data needed to
    enable efficient networking based on automatically generated
    suggestions is to a very large extent professional in nature, such
    as curriculum vitae, publications, research interests, office
    contact information, etc. Nonetheless, if researchers are very
    active on various Web 2.0 platforms, they create significant digital
    traces that can be analyzed by data-mining tools. Identity theft
    [@oecd_scoping_2008] is another salient issue. Profiles may be hacked with
    the intention of damaging somebody’s reputation, or false identity
    may be assumed in order to gain some benefits. Barbour and Marshall [-@barbour_academic_2012]
    argue that under these circumstances it is better to actively shape
    one’s online persona than leaving this to others: <br> *“Although many academics do contribute to their online persona
creation, there are just as many who do not engage with new media in any
meaningful way. However, this does not mean that they are not present
online. The risk of not taking control of one’s own online academic
persona is that others will create one for you. This is what we are
terming the ‘uncontainable self’”* [@barbour_academic_2012].

## Conclusions

A close look at the technical functions of SNS shows that they are
potentially useful for a number of scholarly activities. In fact, they
offer so many services that they theoretically may serve as an
encompassing platform, quasi a “one-stop-service 2.0” of use for all
major tasks within academia—from knowledge production and distribution
to communication and, even beyond the borders of academia’s ivory tower,
for public relations and other connections between science and its
environment. A large-scale implication of SNS would imply a number of
major changes compared to the way scientists interact today. To begin
with, it would diversify the possibilities for interaction, creating a
number of fragmented pieces of information. Every single SNS does that
due to the multiple channels that it provides. The currently unclear
market situation in the field of science-specific SNS enforces this
effect, since it creates even more channels. One could argue that this
might also lead to social diversification of academia, as it comes with
new possibilities for networking and increased transparency, including
novel perspectives for informal communication. It may become visible
with whom researchers interact with, what they read, discuss, and
consider important. What is more, other researchers from various fields
and positions, even students and lay people, might participate in these
interactions. This tendency of lowering status-based communication
hurdles might be regarded as democratization of science. Some would even
argue that this would increase the quality of scientific work, as it may
be checked by more peers in an ongoing process that is much faster than
the regular circles of peer-reviewing.

However, we believe that these assumptions are far-fetched given the
current state of affairs. The diffusion of SNS in academia is still
fairly low and even lower when we focus on active scholars who make full
use of the potential of these platforms. As pointed out above, this is
crucial for SNS because their whole purpose is to create connections
between active users. This limits the general potential of SNS, no
matter whether one sees it as desirable or problematic. Even with
today’s rather low participation, it is obvious that the vast amount of
fragmented information distributed via multiple channels can quickly
become dysfunctional and lead to information overloads. This will rather
work against democratizing effects as scientists (or automated filter
mechanisms) will have to limit their attention even more—most likely to
already well-established scholars and channels. The transition to
(Cyber-)Science 2.0 is to a large extent driven by younger academics who
may partly benefit in this context as they often know “how to play the
game” of Web 2.0 better than their more senior colleagues. For example,
it is not unlikely that a young researcher will be rated higher by a
novel SNS-based metric like the RG Score. However, this advantage will
probably diminish if such numbers gain importance for evaluations.
However, as long as altmetrics still play a minor role, it is anyway
questionable how much such a benefit is really worth. In fact, it may
even lower the status of a researcher because others might regard the
active usage of SNS as a waste of time.

Despite all of these difficulties, especially with regard to reaching
the tipping point of enough scientists actively using SNS, these
services appear to be on the rise. Since a critical mass of users can
turn into a hyper-critical mass – which in itself is problematic – we
should make use of the opportunities of this current transition period.
Academics can (and should) shape future developments instead of leaving
it to commercial providers who follow their own interests. Coming back
to the title of this contribution: Academia might indeed “go Facebook”
if it does not actively interfere by providing and further developing
independent platforms. There are already attempts to do exactly that,
most-notably *Vivo*, which gives academic institutions a lot of freedom
because it is based upon open source software which can be run on local
servers. However, it has apparently not reached a critical mass yet and
it will take more effort within academia to push such independent
projects to the point that they can compete with the temptations of the
global Internet players. Of course, commercial platforms may still
simply create the better platforms with more engaged scholars and it is
debatable as to whether it is desirable to interfere with this. This is
very much a political question which can be answered differently,
depending on one’s point of view. Some will believe in the free market,
others will favor an active involvement of scientific institutions and
policy-makers, maybe even including regulation.

In the meantime, it seems likely that the unclear market situation in
the field of scientific social networks is not going to be clearly
solved very soon. Therefore, the best way to increase the functionality
of these services is interface harmonization (e.g. via APIs), allowing
the various services to connect to each other. There are also academic
initiatives in this direction; for example, *ScholarLib* connects
scientific thematic portals with SNS [@thamm_scholarlib_2012]. Again, such
attempts are limited by the will of the providers to create such
openness via suitable APIs. Obviously, we are witnessing a very dynamic
development with both a promising potential for the future of science
and research—and for reflection.

## References
