---
layout: post
title: "Open Science and the Three Cultures: Expanding Open Science to All Domains of Knowledge Creation"
modified_date: 19 January 2014
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8_5
authors:
 - name: Michelle Sidler
category: basics_background
abstract: |
 The Open Science movement has been most successful in transforming disciplines
 traditionally associated with science. Social science and humanities
 disciplines, especially those in the United States, are less well represented.
 To include all domains of knowledge, the Open Science movement must bridge
 these ‘three cultures’ through projects that highlight multiple lines of
 inquiry, research methods, and publishing practices. The movement should also
 consider changing its moniker to Open Knowledge in order to include academic
 disciplines that do not self-identify as science.
---

> How knowledge circulates has always been vital to the life of the mind,
which all of us share, just as it is vital, ultimately, to the
well-being of humanity.
<small>John Willinsky</small>

In 1959, C. P. Snow’s lecture, ‘The Two Cultures,’ argued that the
sciences and the humanities were divided and at odds: *“Literary
intellectuals at one pole—at the other scientists, and as the most
representative, the physical scientists. Between the two a gulf of
mutual comprehension—sometimes (particularly among the young) hostility
and dislike, but most of all lack of understanding”* (p. 4). These
divisions are felt perhaps most poignantly in American universities.
Several cultural, economic, and historical events have led to increased
divisions between not only the sciences and the humanities, but also the
social sciences. Within each of these ‘three cultures’ (a term coined in
Jerome Kagan’s 2009 book of the same name), sub-disciplinary divides
persist as well, creating pockets, or ‘silos’ of knowledge communities
with their own methods, languages, professional organizations,
identities, and so on.

These divisions have roots in the rise of American universities at the
turn of the twentieth century. At that time, the liberal arts tradition
of a shared curriculum was replaced in many schools by German
educational philosophies that emphasized *Lernfreiheit*, freedom in
learning. *Lernfreiheit* models encouraged students to choose their own
courses and majors and prompted faculty to pursue specialized research;
these changes eventually led to a model of higher education that
replaced generalist courses and professors with individualist
disciplinary departments (Hart 1874). Several national legislative acts
were also passed during and after this philosophical change, and these
moves privileged the sciences, writ large, over the humanities and fine
arts while more or less neglecting the social sciences. First, the
Morrill Act of 1862 established institutions of higher learning in
service to the rising economic needs in industry and agriculture.
Accordingly, these universities emphasized science-related disciplines
over those in the social sciences and humanities[^1]. Next, the
mid-twentieth century saw the establishment of government agencies that
fund science research, and the amount they make available to scientists
far outweighs that of funding for the humanities and fine arts.[^2] Add
these historical factors to the rather abysmal job prospects for most
humanities and social science majors in the present day, and one can
easily understand how disciplinary divisions persist in American
universities. Indeed, some scholars like Kagan argue that the
privileging of the sciences *“created status differentials that eroded
collegiality and provoked defensive strategies by the two less
advantaged cultures”* (2009, p. ix).

Proponents of Open Science must understand these cultural divides as we
move forward into a new era of knowledge, discovery, and collaboration.
Michael Nielsen (2012) and others[^3] have noted that a major challenge
for the Open Science movement is its ability to change the culture of
science itself, which continues to operate within a print-based,
proprietary, and closed framework for scientific discovery and
communication. But a larger challenge looms on the horizon: if the Open
Science movement hopes to advance change among all areas of knowledge
and discovery, it must overtly articulate a larger mission, one that
acknowledges the potential impact of networked technologies on all
fields of knowledge. Perhaps this mission is tacitly assumed, but it
cannot be so, especially when the movement has adopted the moniker, Open
Science. At best, humanities and social science scholars, especially
those in the U.S., will assume that this movement does not apply to them
because ‘science’ is a term generally reserved for disciplines that
employ the scientific method. Such a designation does not include most
areas of the humanities and social sciences. At worst, non-science
scholars will perceive Open Science as a threat, another way in which
scientific disciplines dictate methods for knowledge production and
maneuver for more resources.

This challenge is not insurmountable, but it will involve intensive
collaboration and understanding among scientists, social scientists, and
humanists. Most immediately, we should examine the term ‘Open Science.’
Scholars of language, rhetoric, and writing (like myself) are keenly
aware of the power of words and their associations, and the word
‘science’ carries associations of division and inequality for some
humanities and social science scholars.

Either the movement will have to create and foster a broader definition
of ‘science’ or it will have to replace the term altogether. To use the
moniker effectively, the Open Science movement will have to acknowledge
and address disciplinary divisions and monetary reward systems that led
to this acrimony. A first step might be a broader exploration of the
potential impact that networked technologies will have on different
knowledge areas. Knowledge discovery and communication practices vary
among different disciplines, but no thorough taxonomy of these
differences currently exists within the Open Science community. Figure
One offers just a few examples of the differences between current
publishing practices in the sciences and the humanities (although the
social sciences are not included here, a similar comparison could be
made between the sciences and social sciences). The figure makes clear
that the scientific communication is already utilizing digital channels
of communication much more deliberately and completely than the
humanities. Moreover, digital technologies and open access principles
(like those employed in Open Science initiatives) have so far achieved
minimal impact on publications in the humanities. Such comparisons will
be necessary to inventory the status of publishing and research in
various disciplines, and then to devise ways new technologies might
enhance research and communication across all fields of knowledge.

![**Figure 1**. Publishing practices of the sciences and the humanities.](/images/open_science_three_cultures.png)

Another strategy that would alleviate the potential conflict with the
moniker ‘Open Science’ is to substitute it with the phrase ‘Open
Knowledge.’ This broader, more inclusive alternative is already employed
by at least one organization, the [Open Knowledge Foundation
(OKF)](http://okfn.org/about/vision/); their
vision statement includes comprehensive, inspirational passages that
foreground a desire to be as inclusive as possible: *“We promote the
creation, dissemination and use of open knowledge in all its forms, from
genes to geodata and from sonnets to statistics. Our projects, groups
and tools work with this principle in different and varying ways to
increase user access and ensure transparency.”* OKF includes
investigative examples from the social sciences and humanities (‘sonnets
and statistics’), emphasizing that their mission includes all forms of
knowledge. Compare this to the description of the Science Online
Conference, a major organizing body for Open Science advocates in the
U.S.: *“[ScienceOnline](http://scienceonline.com/about/)* is a non-profit organization
… that facilitates conversations, community, and collaborations at the
intersection of Science and the Web.” Few humanities and social
science scholars in the U.S. would read this description and assume that
their attendance at the conference would be appropriate, or that the
issues discussed at the conference had much impact on their own
disciplines.

Perhaps the most pragmatic strategy for bridging the ‘three cultures’ is
to develop projects that adapt the digital tools of Open Science for
research projects in the humanities and social sciences. OKF is a leader
in this regard as well: they are pursuing initiatives such as the
Shakespeare Project, a website that aims to provide multiple annotated
editions of Shakespeare’s plays. The Shakespeare Project leverages open
source annotation tools, crowdsourcing, and literary works in the public
domain to create a free, open, interactive, and ongoing space of
knowledge production and access. These same principles are at the heart
of perhaps the most extensive and exciting U.S. program that uses
methods similar to Open Science in the humanities, the Office of Digital
Humanities (ODH). ODH is a set-aside program within the National
Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), and its express purpose is to
enhance humanities research through technology. More specifically, ODH
has been aggressively pursuing ways to promote digital methods of
preserving, archiving, and accessing scholarly materials. One of its
initiatives is a series of institutes around the country that train
humanities researchers in the methods and tools of digital analysis,
data curation, and text coding. Like OKF, ODH recognizes that humanities
scholars have a different set of publishing priorities and technological
expertise than that of scientists, so it leverages the most immediately
applicable and effective tools to promote digital research in a
community that has traditionally understood knowledge production as a
print-based, textual enterprise.

While a similar claim can be made about a traditionalist culture in the
sciences—and indeed, it has been made most emphatically by Nielsen
(2012)—the degree to which the humanities and social sciences are
engaged with technology is exponentially smaller. Moreover, the
humanities and social sciences have a qualitatively different
perspective—a different culture, to use Kagan’s (2009) term—that
requires investigation, interpretation, and engagement by Open Science
advocates in order to expand this project more fully into other domains
of knowledge.

## References

Hart, J.M., 1874. *German Universities: a narrative of personal
experience, together with recent statistical information, practical
suggestions, and a comparison of the German, English and American
systems of higher education*, New York: Putnam & Sons.

Kagan, J., 2009. *The three cultures: natural sciences, social sciences,
and the humanities in the 21st century*, Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Lin, T., 2012. Cracking open the scientific process. *NY Times*, p.D1.

Morrill Act of July 2, 1862, Public Law 37-108, 37th Cong., 2nd Sess.
(1862). Enrolled Acts and Resolutions of Congress, 1789-1996; Record
Group 11; General Records of the United States Government; National
Archives.

National Endowment for the Arts, 2012. Appropriations request for fiscal
year 2013. Available at:
<http://www.arts.gov/about/Budget/NEA-FY13-Appropriations-Request.pdf>.

National Endowment for the Humanities, 2012. *Fiscal year 2013 budget
request*, Available at: <http://www.neh.gov/about/legal/reports>.

National Science Foundation, 2012. *FY 213 Budget Request to Congress*,
Available at: <http://www.nsf.gov/about/budget/fy2013/index.jsp>.

Nielsen, M.A., 2012. *Reinventing discovery: the new era of networked
science*, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Snow, C.P., 1961. *The two cultures and the scientific revolution* 7th
ed., New York: Cambridge University Press. Available at:
<http://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/students/envs_5110/snow_1959.pdf>.

Willinsky, J., 2005. *The access principle: the case for open access to
research and scholarship*, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

[^1]: The Morrill Act of 1862 apportioned 30,000 acres (120 km2) to each state. The land was sold or used for “the endowment, support, and   maintenance of at least one college where the leading object shall be, without excluding other scientific and classical studies, and including military tactics, to teach such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and the mechanic arts in order to promote the liberal and practical education of the industrial classes in the several pursuits and professions in life” (The Morrill Act 1862).
[^2]: The National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the National Science Foundation (NSF) provide approximately \$38 billion in research  funding annually (NIH: <http://officeofbudget.od.nih.gov/br.html<nowiki>\>; </nowiki>NSF 2012). This number far outweighs the amount afforded by the major humanities and arts organizations, the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) and the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), which combined have an annual budget of approximately \$308 million (NEH: <http://www.neh.gov/divisions/odh<nowiki>\>; </nowiki>NEA  2012).
[^3]: See, for example, Lin (2012) and Willinsky (2006).
