---
layout: post
title: Research Funding in Open Science
modified_date: 2 March 2014
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8_16
authors:
 - name: Jörg Eisfeld-Reschke
 - name: Ulrich Herb
   orcid: 0000-0002-3500-3119
 - name: Karsten Wenzlaff
category: vision
abstract: |
 The advent of the Open Science paradigm has led to new interdependencies
 between the funding of research and the practice of Open Science. On the one
 hand, traditional revenue models in Science Publishing are questioned by Open
 Science Methods and new revenue models in and around Open Science need to be
 established. This only works if researchers make large parts of their data and
 results available under Open Access principles. If research funding wants to
 have an impact within this new paradigm, it requires scientists and scientific
 projects to make more than just text publications available according to the
 Open Access principles. On the other hand, it is still to be discussed how
 Research Funding itself could be more open. Is it possible to generate a new
 understanding of financing science shaped by transparency, interaction,
 participation, and stakeholder governance—in other words reach the next level
 as Research Funding 2.0? This article focuses on both of the aspects: Firstly,
 how Research Funding is promoting Open Science. Secondly, how an innovative
 and open Research Funding might look like.
---

## Research Funding Policies: Pushing forward Open Science

In the past decades, with new technology allowing interactive
communication between content producers, content consumers, and
intermediaries such as the publishing industry, there has been
tremendous pressure on journalists, politicians, and entrepreneurs to
become more accessible. The Web 2.0, a buzzword comprising of phenomena
such as blogs and social networks, is shaping not just communication,
but also decision-making in communities ranging from Parliamentarians to
CEOs, and from TV staff to newspaper editors.

The scientific community has not felt the same amount of pressure.
Nevertheless, a few scientists have taken the lead: Science blogs are
increasingly popular and scientists tweet and interact with a larger
audience. Universities have opened pages on Facebook and other social
networks, or have created internal networks for communication. We have
even witnessed the rise of social networks that exclusively address
scientists (see chapter 07, Nentwich et al: Academia Goes Facebook? The
Potential of Social Network Sites in the Scholarly Realm). A silent
revolution is on its way with more and more students entering the ivory
tower of academia with a set of communication expectations based on
real-time communication across borders, cultures, and scientific clubs.
The ivory tower opened up some windows which are now being showcased as
Science 2.0.

Meanwhile, a second silent revolution has been taking place. In 2002,
the Soros-founded [Budapest Open Access Initiative](http://www.soros.org/openaccess) called for more
publications along their principles. Ten years later, Open Access has
spread to a plethora of scientific communities, publishers and journals
(Björk et al. 2010; Laakso et al. 2011; Laakso & Björk 2012). The more
common Open Access has become, the more people start to think about what
other sorts of scientific information might be available openly. As is
the case with Open Access, for many initiatives striving for Openness in
the context of scientific information it is quite unclear what kind of
Openness they are claiming or how they define Openness. Some Open Access
advocates are satisfied if scientific publications are available online
and free of charge (so called Gratis Open Access) while others want
these publications to be made available according the principles of the
[Open Definition](http://opendefinition.org), that applies the Open Source paradigm to any sort
of knowledge or information, including the rights to access, reuse, and
redistribute it.

Considering the Open Science concepts as an umbrella, there are several
initiatives (see Herb 2012) that want to open up nearly every component
or single item within research and scientific workflows, e.g.:

-   *Open Review*, which includes both review of funding proposals and
    articles that are submitted for publication, the latter
    traditionally conducted as a peer review. Open Review does not so
    much aim for Openness according to the Open Definition or the Open
    Source Principles, rather it is meant to make the review processes
    more transparent, impeding cliquishness between colleagues as
    submitting scientists and reviewers (Pöschl 2004).
-   *Open Metrics* as a tool for establishing metrics for the
    scientific relevance of publications and data that are independent
    from proprietary databases like the *Web of Science* or the *SCOPUS*
    database which do not only charge fees, but also disallow
    unrestricted access to their raw data.
-   *Open Access to scientific data* according to the [Panton Principles](http://pantonprinciples.org).
-   *Open Access* to scientific publications.
-   *Open Bibliography*, meaning Open Access to bibliographic data.

As we can see, some of these initiatives focus on free or open access to
science related information (in the shape of scientific data, scientific
publications, or bibliographic data), while others promote a more
transparent handling of the assessment processes of scientific ideas and
concepts (such as Open Review and Open Metrics).

Many prominent funding agencies have already adopted policies that
embrace single elements of an Open Science. Among others, the National
Institutes of Health NIH[^4], the Wellcome Trust[^5], the European
Research Council[^6]*,* and the upcoming European Commission Framework
Horizon 2020[^7] also require funded projects to make project-related
research data and publications freely available.

The unfolding science of the future will be characterized not only by
seamless and easy access, but also by interaction, networked and
integrated research information workflows and production cycles,
openness, and transparency. Science (at least in the Western hemisphere)
was an open process in antiquity, having been debated in agoras in the
centre of Greek cities. Even in the Roman Empire, the sharing of ideas
across the Mediterranean Sea had a profound impact on civilisation - the
French, Swedish, English, Italian and German languages attest to the
common linguistic principles that developed in this era. Only with the
ideological dominance of the Catholic doctrines following the collapse
of the Roman Empire did science retreat to monasteries, and scholarly
debate to universities and peer-reviewed science communities. The
Enlightenment ensured that the educated citizenry became involved in
science, but only the Internet has pushed the possibility for a complete
citizen science, not unlike how the Greek science community would have
seen the debate.

Even though the online media and the initiatives mentioned above brought
*Openness* back to scientific communication, one might ask what research
funding which is compliant with the paradigms of Openness and Science
2.0 might look like. As we have seen, many funding agencies require
fundees to make their project-related research results (as data or text
publication) more or less open, or at least freely available, but until
now the processes of research funding are hardly ever considered to be
relevant to Open Science scenarios and appear to be closed, hidden, and
opaque (in contradiction to any idea of Openness).

## Research Funding at Present: Limitations and Closed Discourses

Usually, applications for research funding are reviewed and assessed in
closed procedures similar to the review and assessment of articles
submitted for publication in scientific journals. This also entails that
the reviewers are unknown to the applicant, while, on the other hand,
the applicant is known to the reviewers (so-called *single blind
review*). Horrobin describes the process of evaluating a funding
application as follows:

A grant application is submitted. The administrators send it to
reviewers (usually two) who are specialists in the field and therefore
competitors of the applicant. A committee (usually between ten and 30
members) assesses the application and the reviewers’ reports, perhaps
with a commentary from the administration.”* (Horrobin 1996, p. 1293).
Not only the sequence of events involved in the funding process, but
also the results achieved through the funding as well as the publication
of the results show similarities: in both contexts, the so-called
*Matthew Effect* (Merton 1968) is evident. This effect describes the
fact that authors with an already high citation quotient are more likely
to keep receiving a high number of citations in the future, and that in
the same vein, institutions already attracting vast amounts of funding
can expect to pull in more funds than other institutions (see chapter
18, Fries: The Social Factor in Open Science). A current study of the
Sunlight Foundation reveals this effect for example in the funding
patterns of the National Science Foundation NSF: *“Twenty percent of top
research universities got 61.6% of the NSF funding going to top research
universities between 2008 and 2011.”* (Drutman 2012).

Even the handing-over of the final funding decision from the peers to
so-called *Selection Committees*, whose verdicts are supposed to
incorporate the judgments of the peers, has led to similar results
(v. d. Besselaar 2012). Furthermore, peer decisions on research
funding from the review process do not appear to be objective: Cole,
Cole & Simon presented reviewers with a series of accepted as well as
declined funding applications and examined the consistency of the
(second) judgment. The result: No significant connection between the
first and the second decision on the eligibility of a funding proposal
could be established. The results indicate *“that getting a research
grant depends to a significant extent on chance. The degree of
disagreement within the population of eligible reviewers is such that
whether or not a proposal is funded depends in a large proportion of
cases upon which reviewers happen to be selected for it”* (Cole et al.
1981, p. 881). A study by Mayo et. al. produces similar conclusions, it
“found that there is a considerable amount of chance associated with
funding decisions under the traditional method of assigning the grant to
two main reviewers” (Mayo et al. 2006, p. 842). Horrobin even diagnosed
in 2001 “an alarming lack of correlation between reviewers’
recommendations” (Horrobin 2001, p. 51).

Although the review process for publications as well as for funding
proposals is similar, the consequences of distortions in the reviewing
of funding applications are far more dramatic. Whereas even a mediocre
article, after a series of failed submissions, can hope to be eventually
accepted by some lesser journal, an application for research funding is
stymied from the beginning by the paucity of funding organizations:
*“There might often be only two or three realistic sources of funding
for a project, and the networks of reviewers for these sources are often
interacting and interlocking. Failure to pass the peer-review process
might well mean that a project is never funded.”* (Horrobin 2001, p.
51).

Horobin suggests that the review process for research funding is
inherently conservative as evidenced by the preference for established
methods, theories, and research models, and that reviewers are
furthermore “broadly supportive of the existing organization of
scientific enterprise”. He summarizes: “it would not be surprising if
the likelihood of support for truly innovative research was considerably
less than that provided by chance.” (2001, p. 51). Consequently, the
funding bodies fund *“research that is fundamentally pedestrian,
fashionable, uniform, and second-league—the sort of research which will
not stand the test of time but creates an illusion that we are spending
money wisely. The system eliminates the best as well as the worst and
fails to deliver what those providing the funds expect.”* (Horrobin
1996, p. 1293). The preference for mainstream research is thus an
impediment to innovation: *“The projects funded will not be risky,
brilliant, and highly innovative since such applications would
inevitably arouse broad opposition from the administrators, the
reviewers, or some committee members.”* (Horrobin 1996, p. 1293). In
addition, traditional research funding promotes uniformity:
“Diversity—which is essential, since experts cannot know the source of
the next major discovery - is not encouraged.” (Horrobin 1996, p. 1294).
In a meta-study on the effect of peer reviewing in the funding process,
Demicheli and De Pietrantonj came to the sobering conclusion that: “No
studies assessing the impact of peer review on the quality of funded
research are presently available.” (Demicheli & Di Pietrantonj 2007, p.
2).

Critics of classic research funding are therefore demanding among other
alternatives the allocation of a part of the available funds by lot
through an innovation lottery (Fröhlich 2003, p. 38) or through the
assignment of funds in equal parts to all researchers: “funds [should
be] distributed equally among researchers with academic (…) positions”
(Horrobin 1996, p. 1294). Additionally, the application of the Open
Review described above would ensure greater transparency of the review
process as well as prevent or counteract distortions; however, in actual
fact, Open Review is hardly practiced in funding processes[^8].

In the following, the question as to what extent crowdfunding and other
innovative funding procedures and channels may serve as an alternative
to traditional research funding will be examined.

## Open Research Funding

Open Science and Open Research Funding share mutual spheres of interest.
Both want to advance science through the involvement of citizens, and
both want to make content available that was previously hidden behind
paywalls of traditional science publishers, informal boundaries of
scientific-peer-communities, or formal boundaries established by private
or public funding-bodies. It can be compared as to how two areas of
content creation with similar situation have addressed this demand for
open content: journalism and arts. In both realms, the suppliers of
content vastly outnumber the financiers of content.

There are many more journalists, writers, photographers out there
willing to provide content than there are people willing to invest in
large news corporations, which before the digital era were the only
institutions capable of funding large-scale news publishing.
Notwithstanding the bromide that the Internet has allowed everybody to
publish, it has also allowed everyone to find a financier for publishing
- through self-publishing on the eBook market through micropayments to
crowdfunding sites like [Spot.us](http://spot.us) or [Emphas.is](http://www.emphas.is) we have seen the gradual development of democratized news funding.

Similarly in the arts. While true skills in the arts still require
perseverance, endurance, and none-the-least talent, the Internet has
allowed artists to broaden their audience and reach out to fans, thus
converting them into patrons for the arts. Therefore artists now enjoy
avenues outside of the traditional mechanism in which content is being
produced, sold, and licensed.

Let us examine some cases where this new freedom to find financiers for
content has blended dynamically with Open-Access principles. In 2011,
the [Kickstarter](http://kickstarter.com) project [“Open Goldberg variations”](http://opengoldbergvariations.org) reached
US $ 23.748 by recording the Bach Goldberg Variations for release into
the public domain[^13]:

*“We are creating a new score and studio recording of J.S. Bach's
Goldberg Variations, and we're placing them in the public domain for
everyone to own and use without limitations on licensing. Bach wrote his
seminal work over 270 years ago, yet public domain scores and recordings
are hard or impossible to find. Until now!”*

read the introduction at the Kickstarter project.

The focus of the project is to generate funds for a piece of music that
can be found across the world in music stores, but not in the Public
Domain with easy redistribution, sharing, and mash-up-possibilities.

A similar idea drove the German platform [Sellyourrights.org](http://blog.sellyourrights.org).
Artists were encouraged to release their music into the public domain by
having the music crowdfunded through the fans. Unfortunately, that
experiment was stopped when the German GEMA—a collective rights union
for artists—prohibited musicians (not just GEMA members) from share
their work on the platform.[^15]

Spot.us—an American platform to crowdfund journalism—was also motivated
by public access to investigative journalism. All crowdfunded articles
were released under a CC-by-license, thus allowing attribution and
sharing.[^16] Again, the motivation to create content outside of traditional
publishing avenues is a key factor in the success of crowdfunding.

### Open Research Funding: Some Considerations

A consideration of the criticism voiced against the traditional models
of research funding suggests that innovative procedures of research
funding should exhibit certain characteristics. For example, the
decision-making process leading to a verdict for or against a funding
request should be transparent. Ideally, the decision would be taken not
only by a small circle of (frequently) only two reviewers, but also
involve the entire academic community of the subject in question.
Moreover, the question arises as to whether in the age of electronic
communication research funding still has to be based on bureaucratic
models of delegating responsibility, or whether the direct participation
and involvement of researchers as well as citizens might conceivably be
practiced. Since research funding is not only subject to the inherent
conservative tendencies mentioned above, but also thematically
restricted by the available funding programs, it can also be asked as to
whether there might not be more flexible vehicles that are better suited
for the funding of niche projects unrelated to the buzzwords or academic
discourses of the day.

### Crowdfunding

Obviously, crowdfunding meets several of the aforementioned criteria.
Jim Giles, while commenting also on the public nature of crowdfunding,
states in this context: “*Crowd-funding — raising money for research
directly from the public — looks set to become increasingly common.*”
(Giles 2012, p. 252). In principle, crowdfunding can also be more
closely intertwined with the model of *Citizen Science* than traditional
research funding organizations – for those organizations only a select
and narrowly defined circle of applicants, whether institutions or
individuals, are eligible. While this pre-selection of fundees may be
justified by quality assurance considerations, it also effectively
excludes researchers on the basis of institutional (and thus
non-academic) criteria—a practice that in an age of rising numbers of
*Independent Researchers* conducting their research outside of the
university framework may well be put into question. Giles also points
out the connection between research and the civic society established
through crowdfunding: “It might help to forge a direct connection
between researchers and lay people, boosting public engagement with
science.” (2012, p. 252)

Publicly financed research nevertheless does not appear well-suited to
crowdfunding in the classic sense: research as a process is lengthy,
institutionally anchored, and team-based. It is also expensive. The
results of the research process in many disciplines are not immediately
‘tangible’—rather they are documented in articles, books, or conference
presentations, and more rarely in patents and new products. Researchers
are normally not judged or evaluated according to how well they can
explain their research to the public (not to mention to their students),
but according to how successfully they present themselves to their peers
in the academic journals, conferences, and congresses of their
respective fields.

However, the most important impediment is the research process itself.
In ancient times, the ideal of gaining knowledge was the open dialogue
in the Agora. Our notion of science since the advent of modernity has
been marked by the image of the solitary researcher conducting research
work in splendid isolation either in a laboratory or library. Although
this myth has long since been destroyed by the reality of current
research, it is still responsible for the fact that a substantial part
of the publicly financed academic establishment feels no pressure to
adequately explain or communicate their research and its results to the
public. In particular, there is no perceived need to involve the public
even in the early stages of the research project, for example in order
to discuss the research motivations and methods of a project.

An alternative model of research is described by Open Science. Open
Science aims to publish research results in such a manner that they can
be received and newly interpreted by the public, ideally in an Open
Access journal or on the Internet. However, Open Science also means that
research data are made public and publicly accessible. Yet this concept
of open access is incompatible with current financing models which
profit from limited access to research. The concept is, however,
compatible with the basic notion underlying crowdfunding—that of the
democratization of patronage of the arts, which bears many similarities
to the public patronage of the sciences. A quick glance at the mutually
dependent relationship existing between the ‘free’ arts and company
sponsors, wealthy individuals, and the funding agencies of the public
sector reveals that the supposedly ‘free’ sciences are tied up in an
equally symbiotic relationship with political and economic interests.

The democratization of research financing does not necessarily lead to a
reduction in dependency but rather increases reciprocity. Nevertheless,
in analog fashion to the creative industries, crowdfunding can also be
used as an alternative, supplementary, or substitute financing
instrument in research funding. Just as crowdfunding does for film,
music, literature, or theatre projects, crowdfunding in research has one
primary purpose: To establish an emotional connection between the public
and an object.

If seen in this way, the ideal of the ‘rational scientist’ seems to
contrast with ‘emotional science’. Yet the enormous response elicited in
our communications networks by a small NASA robot operating thousands of
miles away on another planet testifies to the emotional potential
inherent in science. The example of [Cancer Research UK](http://supportus.cancerresearchuk.org/donate/) demonstrates
that this potential can also be harnessed for crowdfunding. As part of
the CancerResearchUK initiative, attempts were made to increase
donations to scientific projects by means of crowdfunding. The special
draw of the campaign was the chance for supporters to reveal their
personal connection to cancer—be it the death from cancer of a friend or
relative, the recovery, the effect of medicines, medical advances, or
research.

What then should a crowdfunding platform for science look like, if it is
supposed to be successful? One thing is clear. It will not look like
Kickstarter, [Indiegogo](http://indiegogo.com), or their German equivalents [Startnext](http://startnext.de),
[Inkubato](http://inkubato.com/de), [Pling](http://pling.de), or [Visionbakery](visionbakery.com). The Kickstarter
interface we have become accustomed to in the creative industries which
can increasingly be considered as ‘learned’ or ‘acquired’ would make
little sense in a scientific research context. Kickstarter is successful
because four key information elements are made so easily graspable and
transparent: Who started the crowdfunding project? How much money is
needed overall? How much still has to be accumulated? What do I get for
my contribution?

Presumably, crowdfunding for science and research will have to rely on
entirely different types of information. A film, for example, is
inextricably bound up with the name of a director, or producer, or
actors; a team of a different stripe will not be able to replicate this
effect. In science, however, the replicability of methods, arguments,
and results is key—therefore research and researcher must be independent
of each other. The knowledge gap a crowdfunding project is supposed to
close is much more salient than the individual researcher. Thus, the big
challenge faced by a crowdfunding platform for research is to visualize
this gap.

The target amount is of much lesser concern in research crowdfunding
than in crowdfunding in the creative industries. In the CancerResearchUK
project, this information was visualized – the score of funds received
up to the current point was visually indicated on the site – but for
most donors the decisive factor in joining was not whether the total
amount needed was ₤ 5000 or ₤ 5000.000, but the concrete result that a
contribution of ₤ 5 or ₤ 50 from crowdfunding would bring about.

Last, but not not least, the rewards: For many research projects, much
thought and creativity will have to be devoted to the rewards, if a
reward-based system of crowdfunding is to be favored over a
donation-based system like [Betterplace](http://betterplace.org). Reward-based crowdfunding
on sites like Kickstarter make it essential to provide some material or
immaterial rewards to incentivize a contribution; donation-based
crowdfunding relies solely on the charitable appeal of a project.

Finding material rewards that are closely connected to the research
process for science projects is not an easy proposition – after all, the
results of such a project are much more complex than in most
crowdfunding projects. Of much greater relevance than the question of
what the scientist can give back to the community is hence the problem
of what the community can give to the researcher. For this reason, the
reward actually lies in the access to science and the research process
that participation in the funding initiative allows.

A crowdfunding platform should therefore conceptualize and visualize the
following three elements as effectively as possible: a) visualization of
knowledge gaps, b) results achieved by funds, c) participation options
for supporters.

Although crowdfunding is still the exception among the financing
instruments used for research projects, it has nonetheless advanced
beyond the merely experimental stage. Among other projects, scientists
were able to raise $ 64.000 through the crowdfunding platform [Open
Source Science Project *OSSP*](http://www.theopensourcescienceproject.com) for a study on the water quality
of the Mississippi River (Giles 2012, p. 252). The way a scientific
crowdfunding platform works so far is largely identical to the way
platforms devoted to other content categories operate: *“Researchers
start by describing and pricing a project, which they submit to the site
for approval. If accepted, the pitch is placed online and donors have a
few weeks or months to read the proposal and make a donation. Some sites
operate on a non-profit basis and channel all proceeds to researchers;
others are commercial concerns and take a cut of the money raised.”*
(Giles 2012, p. 253).

### Social Payments in Science

Related to crowdfunding, but not entirely the same, are new tools known
as social payments. Typically, these are micropayments given for content
that already exists on the net. They share with crowdfunding the notion
of many small payments generating large income through accumulation.
[Flattr](http://flattr.com) and [Kachingle](http://kachingle.com) are two tools commonly associated with social payments. They are a little different from each other, but share
the idea that a content creator embeds a small button on its webpage,
and a content financer in pushing that button ships a small payment to
the content creator.

When the New York Times put their blogs behind a flexible paywall in
2010, Kachingle rose to the occasion and allowed the readers to
“kachingle” the New York Times blogs, in other words transferring a
little bit of money to the writers behind the blogs every time they
visited the site. The New York Times was not amused and sued Kachingle
for using their trademarks - which in the eyes of most commentators was
a reaction to new forms of financing typical of a news monolith .

Flattr, another social payment provider, has deep connections with the
Creative Commons ecosphere. The website Creative Commons employs a
Flattr-button to earn micropayments[^26] and many bloggers are putting
their content both under a CC license and a Flattr-button. However,
there is also one mishap present: Creative Commons are typically shared
under a Non-Commercial Clause, which would prohibit the use of Flattr on
any blog licensing content into the public domain[^27].

How can social payments be applied to science? Already Scienceblogs are
using the social payment system—not necessarily for monetary gains but
also for sharing content, engaging in conversation with readers, and
measuring relevance[^26],
translated by the authors:

*“It is easy to find out how many people access a certain Internet site
– but those numbers can be deceiving. Knowing that X number of people
have clicked on my article on Y is no doubt a good start. But I have no
real insight on how many had a genuine interest in precisely this
article and have read my article and appreciated it and how many only
found my site after a Google search and left after 5 seconds. There may
be tools allowing me to find answers to these questions, but they will
most likely require a lot of work and analysis. But if I have a
Flattr-button under each of my articles, I can assume that only people
who really appreciated reading them will click on it—after all, this
click costs them real money”* says Florian Freistetter, author of a
blog on Astronomy.

The real potential of social payments lies in combination with Open
Access journals, archives, and publications. Imagine, for instance,
databases of publicly available data which allow the users of content to
flattr or kachingle the site whenever they visit it? This would allow
the making of money from scientific content beyond the traditional
licensing systems of universities and libraries. Imagine if a university
has a Flattr account filled with 100.000 Euros per year. Every time a
university member accesses a scientific journal, the 100.000 Euro is
divided among the clicks. This could generate a demand-based but fully
transparent way of funding science.

Social payments could also be integrated into direct funding: For
instance, through scientists receiving a certain amount of public money
or money from funding institutions which cannot be used for their own
projects but must be donated to other projects in their discipline.
Funds as yet unassigned would remain in a payment pool until the end of
the year and then be divided up equally among all projects.

There seems to be some evidence[^26] showing that distributions of social payments follow roughly the
sharing and distribution behavior of content. In other words, content
which is often liked, shared, and tweeted is more likely to receive
funds through Flattr.

Social payments are thus likely to generate an uneven distribution of
science funding—controversial, popular articles and data might generate
more income than scientific publications in smaller fields.

Groundbreaking research might profit from such a distribution mechanism,
especially if a new idea applies to a variety of disciplines. The
established citation networks of scholars and the Matthew Effect
mentioned above might even be stabilized.

Social payments in combination with measuring social media impact could
provide an innovative means of measuring relevance in science. Such
indices would not replace traditional impact scores, such as appearances
in journals, invitations to congresses, and third-party funding, but
would allow assessment of the influence of scientific publications
within the public sphere.

### Virtual Currencies in Science

All of the tools described above relate in one way or another to real
cash-flows in the overall economy. However, these mechanisms might also
work with virtual currencies which may be linked to existing currencies,
but not in a 1-to-1-relationship.

In Flattr, it is customary to be able to use the earned income within
the system to Flattr new content, without having to withdraw cash. The
Flattr ecosystem generates its own value of worth. Similarly, on
crowdfunding sites such as [Sellaband](http://sellabend.de) or [Sonicangel](http://sonicangel.com), fans can
use some of the rewards they receive to fund new artists. The money
stays inside the ecosystem of the platform. Virtual currencies are used
often in games, whereby gamers can turn real money into virtual money
such as Linden Dollars on Second Life or Farmdollars on Farmville; the
virtual money buys goods and services inside the game, both from other
players and the game provider, and the earned income can be withdrawn at
any time. It might be conceivable that a scientific community creates
its own virtual currency. The currency could be used to trade and
evaluate access to data, publications, or other scientific resources.
Let us imagine for instance that a scientist receives a certain amount
of ‘Aristotle-Dollars’ for every publication in the public domain. Based
on the amount of ‘Aristotle-Dollars’ which they earn, they receive
earlier access to public data.

## Some Critical Reflections

### Quality Assurance and Sustainability

One advantage of the peer review system is seen in the provision of
quality assurance, although the procedure, as stated before, has been
criticized. Some of the crowdfunding platforms hosting scientific
project ideas also use peer review (for further details, see Giles
2012); for instance, [SciFlies](http://sciflies.org) and OSSP only publish project ideas
after an expert review. Moreover, only members of scientific
institutions are allowed to present project ideas via OSSP. In one
possible scenario, researchers could identify themselves in crowdfunding
environments by means of an author identifier such as the Open
Researcher and Contributor ID [ORCID](http://about.orcid.org) and document their expert
status in this way (see Chapter 21, Fenner: Unique Identity for a
Researcher). Project proposals from the [#SciFund Challenge](http://scifundchallenge.org), on the
other hand, were not subject to proper peer review but were scrutinized
only in passing. Since the crowdfunding model, however, demands that
each submission reveals the research idea and the project realization, a
mechanism of internal self-selection can be posited: It can be assumed
that scientists will only go public in crowdfunding environments with
projects that are carefully conceived.

The same applies to plagiarism and idea or data theft – these types of
academic misbehavior would almost certainly be revealed through the
public nature of the procedure. The same arguments have also been
offered in support of Open Review. Ulrich Pöschl, editor of the journal
[Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics (ACP)](http://atmospheric-chemistry-and-physics.net), stresses the fact that the
transparency of the submissions process in ACP increases the quality of
submissions because authors are discouraged from proposing articles of
mediocre or questionable quality (Pöschl 2004, p. 107): In the interest
of self-protection and self-preservation, scientists can be expected to
refrain from exposing and potentially embarrassing themselves in their
community with premature or ill-conceived publications. Furthermore,
crowdfunding relies upon self-regulation through the expertise of donors
who in most cases are able to judge the merits of a proposal themselves,
so that weak proposals, if they are made public at all, will have very
poor prospects. Some crowdfunding platforms also use forums as
additional mechanisms of quality assurance; in [FundaGeeks](http://fundageek.com) “Geek
Lounge”, for instance, potential donors can exchange their thoughts on
the weaknesses or strong points of a project idea. Thanks to an expert
discussion in the Kickstarter forum, a questionable project could be
stopped without financial loss for the donors (Giles 2012, p. 253).

In spite of the positive outlook outlined above, scientific crowdfunding
has yet to prove the advantages claimed for it. To conclude with Jim
Giles: *“For crowd-funding to make a real difference, advocates will
have to prove that the process—which sometimes sidesteps conventional
peer review — channels money to good projects, not just marketable
ones.”* (Giles 2012, p. 252). Also somewhat questionable is the
long-term perspective of the projects: Unlike classic research funders,
crowdfunding donors can hardly require fundees to only develop
sustainable service infrastructures, for example. Conversely,
crowdfunding, social payments, and virtual currencies may create new
funding avenues facilitating the funding of specific individual
researchers rather than abstract projects with fluctuating staff. Small
projects with a funding volume below the funding threshold of classic
funders could also be financed with these instruments.

### Plagiarism

As already mentioned, the public character of proposals for crowdfunding
is more likely to expose plagiarism in projects than closed review
procedures. For the same reason, researchers submitting their project
ideas for crowdfunding demonstrate their claim to a scientific idea or
method in a manner that can hardly be ignored, thus discouraging the
plagiarizing of ‘their’ project. To put things into perspective, it must
be mentioned that plagiarism or idea theft has also been reported for
closed review procedures (Fröhlich 2003, p. 54).

### Pop Science, Self-Marketing, and Verifiability

On account of its proximity to citizens and its public character,
crowdfunding also bears the inherent danger of unduly popularizing
research, especially if any individual may donate to a project. Even
though internal platforms for crowdfunding in which only researchers can
donate to a project proposal may develop faster, it is conceivable—as
with the peer review in traditional funding—that mainstream research is
favored. Some also suspect that crowdfunding, but also social payments,
could establish a disproportionate preference of applied research over
basic research (Giles 2012, p. 253). The same could also be suspected
for popular science or science that lends itself easily to media
portrayal.

Crowdfunding, social payments, and virtual currencies place new demands
on researchers’ self-marketing (Ledford 2012), but these demands need
not be a bad thing, since a clear, succinct, and understandable
presentation of a project proposal can only enhance and augment the
verifiability and testability of scientific concepts by eliminating the
dense prose and difficult wording found in many funding applications
(language that is often mandated by funders’ requirements), thus
promoting the intersubjective verifiability of scientific concepts
called for by science theory and philosophy of science.

A more solid grounding in the scientific community might be achieved if
crowdfunding, social payments and virtual currencies were not applied in
entirely open contexts, but rather only within scientific communities
(if necessary under the umbrella of discipline-specific associations or
learned societies). In such a scenario, however, the aspect of
involvement of civic society would be lost.

### What about Openness?

Although crowdfunding, social payments, and virtual currencies appear as
more transparent than traditional avenues of research financing, the
question of the ‘openness’ or accessibility of the research results
nevertheless arises. Whereas traditional financing institutions may
require fundees to make project results publicly available, it is as yet
unclear how projects funded through the innovative procedures detailed
above might be mandated to make their project results accessible for the
public. Of equal importance may be the question of who owns the rights
to a project’s results. In the interest of transparency, it might be
desirable to make the names of donors who contributed to a project
public, so as to identify and prevent potential conflicts of interest.
Conversely, the risk of *sponsorship bias* must not be neglected. The
term *sponsorship bias* refers to the production of results—consciously
or unconsciously—that are consistent with the presumed expectations or
desires of the financiers. To minimize the risks posed by *conflicts of
interest* as well as sponsorship bias, it may be advisable to keep the
identity of the financiers hidden from the fundees until the project’s
end.

## Appendix: A List of Crowdfunding Platforms for Scientific Projects

-   [SciFund Challenge](http://scifundchallenge.org/) hosted by RocketHub.
-   [Open Source Science Project OSSP](http://www.theopensourcescienceproject.com/)
-   [SciFlies](http://sciflies.org/)
-   [PetriDish](http://www.petridish.org/)
-   [iAMscientist](http://www.iamscientist.com/)
-   [Sciencestarter](http://www.sciencestarter.de/) (by now the only German crowdfunding service for
    scientific projects.

## References

Besselaar, van den, P., 2012. Selection committee membership: Service or
self-service. *Journal of Informetrics*, 6(4), pp.580–585.
doi:10.1016/j.joi.2012.05.003.

Björk, B.-C. et al., 2010. Open Access to the Scientific Journal
Literature: Situation 2009 E. Scalas, ed. *PLoS ONE*, 5(6), p.e11273.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0011273.

Cole, S., Cole, J.R. & Simon, G.A., 1981. Chance and consensus in peer
review. *Science*, 214(4523), pp.881–886. doi:10.1126/science.7302566.

Demicheli, V. & Di Pietrantonj, C., 2007. Peer review for improving the
quality of grant applications. In The Cochrane Collaboration & V.
Demicheli, eds. *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews*. Chichester,
UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Available at:
<http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/14651858.MR000003.pub2>.

Drutman, L., 2012. How the NSF allocates billions of federal dollars to
top universities. *Sunlight Foundation Blog*. Available at:
<http://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/2012/09/13/nsf-funding/>.

Fröhlich, G., 2003. Anonyme Kritik: Peer Review auf dem Prüfstand der
Wissenschaftsforschung. *medizin - bibliothek - information*, 3(2),
pp.33–39.

Giles, J., 2012. Finding philanthropy: Like it? Pay for it. *Nature*,
481(7381), pp.252–253. doi:10.1038/481252a.

Herb, U., 2012. Offenheit und wissenschaftliche Werke: Open Access, Open
Review, Open Metrics, Open Science & Open Knowledge. In U. Herb, ed.
*Open Initiatives: Offenheit in der digitalen Welt und Wissenschaft*.
Saarbrücken: Universaar, pp. 11–44.

Horrobin, D.F., 1996. Peer review of grant applications: a harbinger for
mediocrity in clinical research? *The Lancet*, 348(9037), pp.1293–1295.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(96)08029-4.

Horrobin, D.F., 2001. Something rotten at the core of science? *Trends
in Pharmacological Sciences*, 22(2), pp.51–52.
doi:10.1016/S0165-6147(00)01618-7.

Laakso, M. et al., 2011. The Development of Open Access Journal
Publishing from 1993 to 2009 M. Hermes-Lima, ed. *PLoS ONE*, 6(6),
p.e20961. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020961.

Laakso, M. & Björk, B.-C., 2012. Anatomy of open access publishing: a
study of longitudinal development and internal structure. *BMC
Medicine*, 10(1), p.124. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-10-124.

Ledford, H., 2012. Alternative funding: Sponsor my science. *Nature*,
481(7381), pp.254–255. doi:10.1038/481254a.

Mayo, N. et al., 2006. Peering at peer review revealed high degree of
chance associated with funding of grant applications. *Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology*, 59(8), pp.842–848.
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2005.12.007.

Merton, R.K., 1968. The Matthew Effect in Science: The reward and
communication systems of science are considered. *Science*, 159(3810),
pp.56–63. doi:10.1126/science.159.3810.56.

Pöschl, U., 2004. Interactive journal concept for improved scientific
publishing and quality assurance. *Learned Publishing*, 17(2),
pp.105–113. doi:10.1087/095315104322958481.

White, E., 2012. On making my grant proposals open access. *Jabberwocky
Ecology*. Available at:
<http://jabberwocky.weecology.org/2012/08/08/on-making-my-grant-proposals-open-access/>.


[^4]: SHERPA/JULIET. NIH: <http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/juliet/index.php?fPersistentID=9>

[^5]: SHERPA/JULIET. Wellcome Trust: <http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/juliet/index.php?fPersistentID=12>

[^6]: SHERPA/JULIET. European Research Council: <http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/juliet/index.php?fPersistentID=31>

[^7]: European Commission: <http://ec.europa.eu/research/horizon2020/index_en.cfm>

[^8]: At least some scientists make their funding proposals available after the review is finished (on their motivation see White 2012)

[^13]: Kickstarter: <http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/293573191/open-goldberg-variations-setting-bach-free>

[^15]: Unreturned Love: <http://blog.sellyourrights.org/?p=252>

[^16]: Cancer Research UK: <http://supportus.cancerresearchuk.org/donate>

[^26]: FlattrBlog: <http://blog.flattr.net/2011/08/great-things-creative-commons>

[^27]: Techdirt: <http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20120828/00585920175/should-creative-commons-drop-its-noncommercial-noderivatives-license-options.shtml>
