---
layout: post
title: Open Innovation and Crowdsourcing in the Sciences
modified_date: 19 January 2014
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8_17
authors:
 - name: Thomas Schildhauer
 - name: Hilger Voss
category: vision
abstract: |
 The advent of open innovation has intensified communication and interaction
 between scientists and corporations. Crowdsourcing added to this trend.
 Nowadays research questions can be raised and answered from virtually anywhere
 on the globe. This chapter provides an overview of the advancements in open
 innovation and the phenomenon of crowdsourcing as its main tool for
 accelerating the solution-finding process for a given (not only scientific)
 problem by incorporating external knowledge, and specifically by including
 scientists and researchers in the formerly closed but now open systems of
 innovation processes. We present perspectives on two routes to open innovation
 and crowdsourcing: either asking for help to find a solution to a scientific
 question or contributing not only scientific knowledge but also other ideas
 towards the solution-finding process. Besides explaining forms and platforms
 for crowdsourcing in the sciences we also point out inherent risks and provide
 a future outlook for this aspect of (scientific) collaboration.
---

##What is Open Innovation and What is Crowdsourcing?

Nowadays, companies use online co-creation or crowdsourcing widely as a
strategic tool in their innovation processes (Lichtenthaler &
Lichtenthaler 2009; Howe 2008). This open innovation process and opening
up of the creation process can be transferred to the field of science
and research, which is called open science.

Here we see open science on a par with open innovation: both incorporate
external knowledge in a research process. One way of doing this is
“crowdsourcing”. Companies use open innovation when they cannot afford a
research and development department of their own but still need external
or technical knowledge, or when they want to establish an
interdisciplinary route to problem-solving processes. This can be an
interesting working milieu for scientists as their involvement in these
open innovation processes may lead to third-party funding.

Firms usually initiate open innovation processes by setting up
challenges of their own or using dedicated platforms; participation is
often rewarded by incentives. The kinds of problems that crop up in the
context of open innovation can be very diverse: Challenges can include
anything from a general collection of ideas to finding specific
solutions for highly complex tasks. IBM’s “Innovation Jam”
(www.collaborationjam.com) or Dell's “IdeaStorm” (www.ideastorm.com)
(Baldwin 2010) quote companies that involve employees of all departments
and partners in open innovation as an example. They also interact with
external experts, customers and even researchers from universities and
other scientific institutions, who do not necessarily belong to the
research and development department, in order to pool and evaluate
ideas. This concept was introduced by Henry W. Chesbrough (Chesbrough
2003).

Firms tend to favor tried-and-tested solutions and technologies when
working on innovations: Lakhani (2006) defined this behavior as local
search bias. To his way of thinking, co-creation can be seen as a tool
for overcoming the local search bias by making valuable knowledge from
outside the organization accessible (Lakhani et al. 2007). Von Hippel
names various studies that have shown some favorable impacts that user
innovation has on the innovation process (von Hippel 2005).

The advantages of open innovation are not only of interest to companies
and firms: it is also becoming increasingly popular with the scientific
community in terms of collaboration, co-creation and the acceleration of
the solution-finding process (Murray & O’Mahony 2007). In the fields of
software development (Gassmann 2006; von Hippel & von Krogh 2012) and
drug discovery (Dougherty & Dunne 2011) in particular, scientists have
discovered the advantages of open collaboration for their own work: open
science—which, for the sake of simplicity, we can define as the
inclusion of external experts into a research process.

Most open innovation initiatives do not necessarily address the average
Internet user. Often scientists and other specialists from different
disciplines are needed: Lakhani et al. (2007) find that the individuals
who solve a problem often derive from different fields of interest and
thus achieve high quality outcomes.

Open innovation accordingly refers to the inclusion of external experts
into a solution-finding process. This process was hitherto thought to be
best conducted solely by (internal) experts (Chesbrough 2003). Opening
up the solution-finding process is the initial step of using
participatory designs to include external knowledge as well as
outsourcing the innovation process (Ehn & Kyng, 1987; Schuler & Namioka,
1993). Good ideas can always come from all areas. Special solutions,
however, require specialized knowledge and, of course, not every member
of the crowd possesses such knowledge (“mass mediocrity”, Tapscott &
Williams 2006, p. 16). The intense research on open innovation confirmed
this conjecture (Enkel et al. 2009; Laursen & Salter 2006).

Before the term “open innovation” came into existence it was already
common for companies to integrate new knowledge gained from research
institutes and development departments into their innovation processes
(Cooper 1990, 1994; Kline & Rosenberg 1986).

Crowdsourcing refers to the outsourcing of tasks to a crowd that
consists of a decentralized, dispersed group of individuals in a
knowledge field or area of interest beyond the confines of the given
problem, who then work on this task (Friesike et al. 2013).
Crowdsourcing is used by businesses, non-profit organizations,
government agencies, scientists, artists and individuals: A well-known
example is Wikipedia, where people all over the world contribute to the
online encyclopedia project. However, there are numerous other ways to
use crowdsourcing: On the one hand, the crowd can be activated to vote
on certain topics, products or questions (“crowd voting”), or they can
also create their own content (“crowd creation”). This input can consist
of answering more or less simple questions (such as Yahoo Answers),
creating designs or solving highly complex issues, like the design of
proteins (which we will revert to further down).

Figure 1 provides an overview of the different aims and tasks of open
innovation and crowdsourcing. The position of the varying fields in the
diagram mirrors a certain (not necessarily representative) tendency:
questions and answers can be fairly complex, a task in design can be
easy to solve and human tasks (like [*Amazon Mechanical
Turk*](https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome)) can actually include the
entire spectrum from simple “click-working” to solving highly complex
assignments.

![**Figure 1**. Crowdsourcing and open innovation.](/images/open_innovation_and_crowdsourcing.png)

This section focuses on scientific methods for open science via
crowdsourcing, also including possibilities and risks for open
innovation and crowdsourcing in the sciences. Two major aspects of
online crowd creation via crowdsourcing are *firstly* being part of a
crowd by contributing to a question raised on a crowdsourcing platform
and *secondly* posing a question to be answered by a crowd.

Specialists, scientists in particular, are now the subject of closer
inspection: how can scientists and scientific institutions in particular
take part in open innovation and open up science projects, and how can
they collaborate with companies?

## How Scientists Employ Crowdsourcing

The use of crowdsourcing not only makes it possible to pool and
aggregate data but also to group and classify data. It would seem,
however, that the more specific a task, the more important it becomes to
filter specialists out of the participating mass.

Scientists can chose between four main forms of crowdsourcing:

1.  Scientists can connect to individuals and to interest communities in
    order to collate data or to run through one or a set of easy tasks,
    such as measurements.
2.  Scientists can also use the Internet to communicate with other
    scientists or research labs with whom they can conduct research into
    scientific questions on equal terms.
3.  The second option can also work the other way round: scientists or
    experts can contribute to scientific questions.
4.  Options 2. and 3. are frequently chosen by firms and companies as a
    means of open innovation, often combined with monetary benefits for
    the participant.

We can conclude that the two major forms of open innovation and
crowdsourcing in the sciences are: contributing towards a solution
(perspective 1) and requesting a solution (perspective 2).

## Perspective 1: Contributing to a Crowdsourcing Process (Open Science)

One form of open innovation through crowdsourcing in the sciences is to
contribute to research questions by setting out ideas—often free of
charge. In sciences like mathematics and biology or medicine, in
particular, open science is a well-known and much appreciated form of
scientific collaboration.

One famous example is the U.S. “Human Genome
Project”[^1], which was coordinated by the U.S. Department of Energy and the National
Institutes of Health. It was completed in 2003, two years ahead of
schedule, due to rapid technological advances. The “Human Genome
Project” was the first large scientific undertaking to address potential
ethical, legal and social issues and implications arising from project
data. Another important feature of the project was the federal
government's long-standing dedication to the transfer of technology to
the private sector. By granting private companies licences for
technologies and awarding grants for innovative research, the project
catalyzed the multibillion dollar U.S. biotechnology industry and
fostered the development of new medical applications[^2].
This project was so successful that the first, original project spawned
a second one: the “encode
project”[^3]. The
National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) launched a public
research consortium named ENCODE, the Encyclopedia of DNA elements, in
September 2003, to carry out a project for identifying all the
functional elements in the human genome
sequence[^4].

Another famous project was proposed by Tim Gowers, Royal Society
Research Professor at the Department of Pure Mathematics and
Mathematical Statistics at Cambridge University who set up the [“polymath
project”](http://polymathprojects.org/), a blog where he puts up tricky
mathematical questions. Gowers invited his readers to participate in
solving the problems. In the case of one problem, it so happened that,
37 days and over 800 posted comments later, Gowers was able to declare
the problem as solved.

Collaborating online in the context of open science can be achieved
using a multitude of various tools that work for scientists but also for
any other researchers: such as a digital workbench, where users can
collaborate by means of online tools (network.nature.com); They can also
build open and closed communities or workshop groups consisting of
worldwide peers by exchanging information and insights
(DiagnosticSpeak.com, Openwetware.org); researchers can also establish
social networks and pose questions and get them answered by colleagues
from all over the world (ResearchGate.com).

## Perspective 2: Obtaining Support for One’s Own Science (Citizen Science)

The other aforementioned aspect of open innovation through crowdsourcing
in the sciences is to ask a community for help. This aspect refers to
[Luis von Ahn](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~biglou) and his approach to “human
computation”: numerous people carry out numerous small tasks (which
cannot be solved by computers so far). To ask a community for help works
in “citizen science”, which, for the sake of simplicity, we can define
as the inclusion of non-experts in a research process, whether it is a
matter of data collection or specific problem-solving. Crowdsourcing is
a well-known form of “citizen science”. Here, as scientificamerican.com
explains, “research often involves teams of scientists collaborating
across continents. Now, using the power of the Internet, non-specialists
are participating, too.”[^5]

There are various examples where scientists can operate in this manner
and obtain solutions by asking the crowd. This form of crowdsourcing is
also present in the media: scientific media bodies have established
incorporated websites for citizen science projects
like <http://www.scientificamerican.com/citizen-science>
where projects are listed and readers are invited to take part. In view
of the crowdsourcing strategy “Ask the public for help”, scientists can
use these (social) media websites to appeal to the public for
participation and help. A research area or assignment might be to make
observations in the natural world to count species in the rain forest,
underwater or pollinators visiting plants - especially sunflowers, as
in [The Great Sunflower Project](http://www.greatsunflower.org/) - or to
solve puzzles to design proteins, such as in
the [FoldIt](http://fold.it.portal/) project. Citizens interested in this
subject and scientists working in this field of knowledge can therefore
be included as contributors.

A very vivid example is the [“Galaxy Zoo”](http://www.galaxyzoo.org) project. Briefly, the task is to help classify galaxies. Volunteers are asked to help and it turned out that
the classifications <http://www.galaxyzoo.org>
provides are as good as those from professional astronomers. The results
are also of use to a large number of researchers.

Another example of how to activate the crowd is ARTigo, a project from
art history. A game has been created and each player helps to provide
keywords or tags for images. The challenge here is to find more suitable
tags—preferably hitherto unnamed ones—than a rivaling player in a given
time. The Institute for Art History at the Ludwig Maximilian University
in Munich was accordingly able to collect more than four million tags
for its stock of more than 30,000 images[^6]. Paying experts to perform
this task would have been unaffordable.

The following examples show how different platforms allow scientists and
other experts to engage in open innovation, and how scientists and
research departments can use these platforms for their own purposes.

  ---------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------- -------------------------------- --------------------------------------- ------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                   **Innocentive**                                                            **Innoget**                                               **Solution-Xchange**               **One Billion Minds**            **Presans**                             **Inpama**                **Marblar**
  **Country**      USA                                                                        Spain                                                     India                              Germany                          France                                  Germany                   UK
  **Founded in**   2001                                                                       2007                                                      2008                               2009                             2008                                    2012                      2012
  **Focus**        innovation challenges (initiated by companies/ organisations); community   innovation challenges and presentation of new solutions   innovation challenges; community   scientific and social projects   search for experts on specific issues   completed ideas to date   develop products based on new and existing technologies; gamification
  ---------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------- -------------------------------- --------------------------------------- ------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Innocentive](<http://www.innocentive.com>)

Innocentive.com is the best known open innovation platform that allows
companies and experts to interact (Wessel 2007). It was founded by the
pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly. According to their own information,
there are now more than 260,000 “problem solvers” from nearly 200
countries registered on Innocentive.com. Thanks to strategic (media)
partnerships, however, more than 12 million “solvers” can be reached.
Over \$ 35 million were paid out to winners, with sums ranging between
\$ 500 and over \$ 1 million, depending on the complexity of the task.

### Forms of challenges and competitions

Challenges can either be addressed to the external community, or they
may be limited to certain groups of people, such as employees. There are
also various forms of competitions: “Ideation Challenge”, “Theoretical
Challenge”, “RTP Challenge” and “eRFP Challenge”.

-   “Ideation Challenges” are for the general brainstorming of ideas -
    relating to new products, creative solutions to technical problems
    or marketing ideas, for example. In this case, the solver grants the
    seeker the non-exclusive rights to his ideas.
-   “Theoretical Challenges” represent the next level: ideas are worked
    out in detail, accompanied by all the information required to decide
    whether or not the idea can be turned into a finished product or
    solution. The period of processing is longer than for an “Ideation
    Challenge”. The financial incentives are also much higher. The
    solver is usually requested to transfer his intellectual property
    rights to the seeker.
-   “RTP Challenge” calls for a further solution layout on how the
    solution, once it has been found, can be applied by the company that
    invited contributions. The “solvers” are accordingly given more time
    to elaborate the drafts they have submitted, while the reward rises
    simultaneously. Depending on how the challenge is put, either the
    intellectual property rights are transferred to the “seeker” or the
    “seeker” is at least given a licence to use.
-   “eRFP Challenge” is the name of the last option to pose a challenge.
    Scientists in particular might be interested in this option:
    Normally, companies have already invented a new technology and are
    now looking for an experienced partner—like external consultants or
    suppliers—to finalize the developed technology. In this case, legal
    and financial stipulations are negotiated directly between the
    cooperating parties.

The site’s “Challenge Center” feature provides an opportunity for
interaction between the “seekers” and “solvers”. Companies and
institutions—the “seekers”—post their assignments, and the “solvers”
select those that are of interest to them based on the discipline in
which they work.

### Registration, profile and CV

Anybody can register as a “solver”, even anonymously, if they chose, but
a valid email address is required. The profile, which is open to the
public, can either be left blank or provide substantial personal
information. It is possible to name one’s own fields of expertise and
interest. There is no strict format for the CV; academic degrees and a
list of publications may be mentioned. External links, to one’s own
website, for example, or to a social network profile can be added. The
“solver” can decide whether he or she wants to make his or her former
participations in challenges public. “Solvers” can easily be classified
on the basis of this information: the “seeker” obtains an immediate
impression of how many “solvers” might have the potential to contribute
a solution for the given task. It is also possible to recruit new
“solvers”. In this case the “seeker” can observe the activities of the
“solvers” involved (under “referrals”). If a successful solution is
submitted, the “solver” who recruited his colleague who actually solved
the problem gets a premium. The recruitment takes place via a direct
linkage to the challenge. This link can be published on an external
website or in a social network. The “InnoCentive Anywhere” App creates
an opportunity for the “solver” to keep up-to-date with regard to
forthcoming challenges.

## [Innoget](http://www.innoget.com>)

Innoget focuses on linking up organizations that generate innovations
with those that are in search of innovation, both having equal rights.
Research institutions in particular are addressed as potential solution
providers. Solution providers can put forward their proposals for a
solution in return for ideas on creating a surplus which might be
valuable to them. The basic difference between this and Innocentive.com
is that, while Innocentive builds up a community—quite detailed profile
information including expertise, subjects of interest and (scientific)
background are called for—which makes it possible to form teams to find
solutions for a challenge, Innoget.com merely asks for a minimum set of
profile questions. It also has to be mentioned that offering
solutions/technologies has to be paid for, so Innoget.com seems to be
less interesting to individuals than to companies. Participating in and
posing challenges is free of charge, although other options have to be
remunerated: providing a company profile and starting an anonymous
challenge, for instance. Offers and requests are both furnished with
tags detailing the branch and knowledge field. You can also look for
partners via the detailed search provided. You can choose categories
like countries, nature of challenge (such as a collaboration, licensing
or a research contract) or organization/institution (major enterprise,
public sector, university etc.).

## [SolutionXchange](http://www.solutionxchange.com>)

SolutionXchange.com was founded by Genpact, an Indian provider of
process and technology services that operates worldwide. A distinctive
feature is that only Genpact-members and customers can submit challenges
to the platform.

As mentioned in the previous examples, registration is easy and free to
all experts and users. After naming the most basic information, such as
primary domain and industry, it is possible to add detailed information
on one’s profile: education, career or social network links etc., but
you can opt to dispense with that. As soon as you have registered, you
can upload white papers or your own articles or write blog entries that
you wish to be discussed. You can also join and found communities. At
SolutionXchange.com you can also request to join the network as a
pre-existing group or organization.

Ongoing challenges are initially listed according to your profile
information; after using filter options, different challenges will be
displayed on your profile page as well. Of special interest is the area
called “IdeaXchange”, where all the different communities, articles and
blogs appear and—independent of the actual challenges—external experts
meet Genpact members for discussion. Submitted articles are evaluated by
Genpact experts or by the companies that set up the challenge. At the
end of the challenge, Genpact has the opportunity to assign individual
experts with the task of evolving an idea that was remunerated,
depending on the importance or size of the project or the time spent on
development.

## [One Billion Minds](<http://www.onebillionminds.com>)

This platform calls itself “Human Innovation Network”; “openness”
according to the open innovation principle is highlighted in particular.

Registration is simple, detailed information on one’s profile cannot be
named, but you can type in links to your profile located on an external
social network.

Inviting contributions towards a given challenge is simple, too: after
providing information on the challenger (whoever set up the challenge:
company, non-profit organization, individual as well as the origin) only
the challenge’s title, a further description of it and a public
LinkedIN-profile are required. Afterwards the challenger has to describe
the aim of the challenge, possible forms of collaboration between
initiator/challenger and participant, a deadline and a description of
the rewards (not necessarily monetary rewards). It is also possible to
pay for and charge Onebillionminds.com with moderating the submitted
answers. At
<http://Onebillionminds.com> social and scientific projects have equal rights to those that have an
economical aim. The declared intention of is “to
change the world”.[^7]

## [Presans](<http://presans.com>)

Presans.com follows a very different approach from those mentioned
above: The company provides a search engine that—according to the
platform’s own description—browses through the whole data base that
contains about one million experts looking for matching partners. Here
Presans.com keeps a low profile when it comes to selection criteria:
Nevertheless, it seems that publications and the assurance of the
expert’s availability are of value. This issue is based on the
assumption that the solution-seeking company often does not know what
kind of solution the company is actually looking for.

## [Inpama](<http://inpama.com>)

Inpama.com enables inventors and scientists to present their solutions
ready for licensing and accordingly ready to be put on the market.
Inpama.com was founded by IntentorHaus, a company that runs several
inventors’ businesses and inventor or patent platforms in the
German-speaking countries. Companies that are looking for solutions can
receive information on offers that fit their own business area, so they
can easily get in touch with inventors. Impama.com offers inventors
various possibilities via different media such as image, text, video or
weblinks to describe their products and patents. Tags mark the product’s
category. Also, Inpama.com offers further information and assistance
with impoving the product or invention by contacting test consumers or
industrial property agents or by marketing the invention.

## [Marblar](<http://marblar.com>)

Marblar.com adopts a very interesting approach. Assuming that a minimum
of 95 per cent of the inventions that have been developed at
universities are never realized, scientists should be given a chance to
present their inventions to potential financiers and to the public. The
special aspect in this instance is for the presented inventions to be
developed further through gamification: Players can earn points and can
receive monetary rewards up to £ 10,000. In this way, Marblar.com helps
to make inventions useful that would have been filed away. Marblar.com
also helps to open up a further source of income to the research
institutions.

## A Landscape of Today's Platforms: Summary

The crowdsourcing platforms often consist of creatives that participate
either by submitting active content, such as contributions to a
challenge, or by judging contributions to challenges. Referring to the
platform Innocentive.com, where more than 200,000 “problem solvers” are
registered, it is obvious that not every single member submits input for
every single challenge. Due to the size of the group, however, there is
a very great likelihood that a lot of valuable ideas will be put
forward. Technically speaking, it is possible that every participant
could take part in every challenge, but this is not true of all the
platforms mentioned here. Nevertheless, Innocentive.com provides an
opportunity of thinking “outside the box” because it allows the
participants to name not only their own field of knowledge but also
their field of personal interest. It is accordingly possible to generate
new ways of solving complex problems. It seems obvious that either
communication and interaction within a community or the building of new
communities is of interest: the submitted ideas are frequently hidden.
It is possible that lots of companies are not as “open” as open
innovation suggests, but perhaps concealing ideas is not that absurd
after all: these open innovation challenges do not interact with the
masses like many other common crowdsourcing projects do. Many
crowdsourcing platforms that work in the field of open innovation
provide an opportunity for organizing challenges for closed groups or
pre-existing communities whose members are either invited, belong to the
company or other associated communities that are then sworn to secrecy.

As shown above, scientists can choose between diverse platforms if they
want to participate in open innovation. Usually you can register with
detailed profiles. In most cases you can communicate with different
experts within your fields of knowledge or interest. In this way, there
are other advantages apart from the financial benefits in the event of
winning a challenge: insights into a company’s internal problems are
given that might also fit in with a scientist’s own range of duties.

It is apparent that there are a great many inspiring options and
processes to be gained from the variety of platforms, which may play a
substantial role in fostering the integration of and collaboration
between scientists.

It will be exciting to watch and see how Marblar’s gamification
principle develops and to find out if financial incentives are to remain
the most important aspect of open innovation. But how do individuals,
companies, scientists and experts respond to platforms like Inpama.com
or Presans.com: will challengers/inititators prefer to submit challenges
to platforms like Innocentive.com or do they accept the possibility of
search engines browsing through the data of submitted technologies?

The legal aspect remains of considerable importance: Innocentive.com
outlines the point of the challenge fairly clearly when intellectual
property changes ownership. But still, details of that have to be
discussed between the “solver” and the “seeker”.

## Risks in Crowdsourcing Science

It is clear that different risks have to be taken into account when
using or applying the methods of crowdsoucing or open innovation. The
crowd is not invincible, although often praised for clustered
intelligence. A high number of participants does not guarantee the
finding of an ideal solution.

But who actually makes the final decision about the quality of the
contributions in the end? Does it make sense to integrate laymen,
customers or individuals and researchers who work outside the problem
field into these kind of creative processes in any case?

A detailed and unambiguous briefing by the platform host seems to be
called for. This also applies to participants: ideas need to be short
and formulated clearly in order to survive the evaluation process. It is
one thing for a company to ask its target group about marketing problems
but quite another to ask the target audience—where only a few are
professionals in the problem field—to solve difficult and complex
(research) questions. Nevertheless, human tasks of different but less
complexity can be carried out by anonymous carriers, although the limits
are still reached fairly quickly.

Another important factor is dealing with the high number of submitted
ideas and proposed solutions. Who should and might actually be able to
evaluate them all? How does one avoid overlooking the best ideas? Often
crowdsourcing also means that the participants themselves evaluate their
proposals—in this way a form of pre-selection takes place and points out
ideas that should attract interest. Nonetheless, manipulation may occur
when networks or communities fuse to support certain ideas because they
aim to win the prize, inflict damage on the initiator or for any other
reasons. You can overcome this risk by backing up the crowdsourcing
process with a jury of experts who monitor the process and can intervene
and provide a final evaluation, where required.

There is always the risk of a participant losing his or her idea without
getting paid for it. This might even happen without the initiator’s
appearance: it is possible that other participants or external viewers
steal the idea. In this context we have to mention that it is frequently
only the winner who gets rewarded for his or her input —all the other
participants miss out although they might have contributed several days
of dedicated effort for the purpose of the challenge.

For contestants, crowdsourcing and open innovation are a very debatable
source of income. The safeguarding of a contestant’s property is left to
his or her own resources. Researchers should therefore check the
agreement drawn up between them and the platform host to see whether
intellectual property is covered properly. This can be ensured by
documenting timestamps and with the help of a good community management
through the platform host.

Of interest to both parties is the delicate question of profit
participation: what happens if the creative director receives 1000 Euros
for his or her idea but the company makes millions out of this idea? The
question remains why a researcher or other collaborator should join in
without any certainty that his or her contribution at any stage of the
research / creation process is of value, whether it will be appreciated
and adequately remunerated. [Anmerkung des Lektors: annealed = gehärtet
bzw. geglüht z.B. bei der Stahlproduktion. jk]

So, the initiator and participant have to take a careful look at legal
protection. Actually, this can prove to be quite easy: The initiator can
set up the rules and the participant can decide, after having' studied
the rules, whether he or she agrees and wants to participate or not. A
situation under constraint, such as financial dependence, is often
rejected a priori. Assigning intermediaries can often serve to adjust a
mismatch. The more specialized the task, the more weight rests with the
expert or “solver”. Internet communication enables the solver to draw
attention to unfair conditions: Both platform host and initiator are
interested in retaining a good reputation; any possible future
participants might be discouraged. Much depends on the question of how
the Internet can be used to connect B2C or B2B companies, scientists or
research institutions to target groups and how to receive desired
opinions and ideas; but also how to integrate scientists in particular?
How to ensure and achieve valid results? What legal, communicative,
social factors need to be contemplated? And what further steps are there
to mind after a crowdsourcing process? It would be unflattering if
customers, scientists and creatives were motivated to participate but,
after that, nothing happened or they weren’t mentioned in reports on the
crowdsourcing process. That would only cause or aggravate frustration
and that is something nobody needs.

## Outlook: What the Future Might Bring

A possible future route for development might be hyper-specialization:
“Breaking work previously done by one person into more specialized
pieces done by several people” (Malone et al. 2011). This means that
assignments that are normally carried out by one or only a few people
can be divided into small sections by accessing a huge “crowd” of
experts including researchers from all knowledge fields and task areas.

There is usually an inadequate number of hyper-specialists working for a
company. Provided the transition between different steps of a working
process is smooth, the final result might be of a higher quality. Here
the following question arises: at what point would “stupid tasks” start
to replace the highly specialized work, i.e. where experts are reduced
to the level of a mental worker on the assembly line?

One possible result of open innovation’s success might also be the
decline or disappearance of research and development departments or
whole companies: to begin with, staff members would only be recruited
from the crowd and only then for work on individual projects.

Another outcome might also be that the social media principle of
user-generated content could be transferred to the area of media
products: normal companies could be made redundant if the crowd develops
products via crowdsourcing and produces and finances them via
crowdfunding.

A further conceivable consequence might be the the global spread of the
patent right’s reform: new solutions might not get off the ground if
they violated still existing patents. The more the crowd prospers in
creating inventions, developments and ideas, the more difficult is
becomes to keep track and avoid duplicates in inventions. This raises
the question of authorship: what happens to authorship if the submitted
idea was created by modifying ideas put forward by the crowd’s comments?
When does the individual become obsolete so that only the collective
prevails? Do we begin to recognize the emergence of a future model where
individuals are grouped and rearranged according to the ideas being
shared and the resulting benefits? And to what extent will the open
source trend increase or find its own level?

## References

Baldwin, C.Y., 2010. When open architecture beats closed: The
entrepreneurial use of architectural knowledge. In Massachusetts, USA:
Harvard Business School.

Chesbrough, H.W., 2003. *Open innovation: the new imperative for
creating and profiting from technology*, Boston, Mass: Harvard Business
School Press.

Cooper, R.G. & Kleinschmidt, E.J., 1994. Perpektive. Third Generation
New Product process. *Journal of Product Innovation Management*, 11,
pp.3–14.

Dougherty, D. & Dunne, D.D., 2011. Digital Science and Knowledge
Boundaries in Complex Innovation. *Organization Science*, 23(5),
pp.1467–1484. doi:10.1287/orsc.1110.0700.

Ehn, P. & Kyng, M., 1987. The collective resource approach to systems
design. In G. Bjerknes, P. Ehn, & M. Kyng, eds. *Computers and
democracy*. Aldershot, England: Avebury, pp. 17–58.

Enkel, E., Gassmann, O. & Chesbrough, H., 2009. Open R&D and open
innovation: exploring the phenomenon. *R&D Management*, 39(4),
pp.311–316.

Friesike, S., Send, H. & Zuch, A.N., 2013. Participation in Online
Co-Creation: Assessment and Review of Motivations. In unpublished work.

Gassmann, O., 2006. Opening up the innovation process: towards an
agenda. *R&D Management*, 36(3), pp.223–228.

Hippel, von, E., 2005. Democratizing innovation. The evolving phenomenon
of user innovation. *Journal für Betriebswirtschaft*, 55(1), p.63—78.

Hippel, von, E. & Krogh, von, G., 2003. Open Source Software and the
“Private-Collective” Innovation Model: Issues for Organization Science.
*Organization Science*, 14(2), pp.209–223.
doi:10.1287/orsc.14.2.209.14992.

Howe, J., 2008. *Crowdsourcing: why the power of the crowd is driving
the future of business* 1st ed., New York: Crown Business.

Kline, S.J. & Rosenberg, N., 1986. An Overview of Innovation. In R.
Landau, ed. *The Positive Sum Strategy*. Washington, p. 275—305.

Lakhani, K.R., 2006. *The core and the periphery in distributed and
self-organizing innovation systems*. Doctor’s Thesis. Cambridge,
Massachussetts, USA: MIT Sloan School of Management.

Lakhani, K.R. et al., 2007. The value of openness in scientific problem.
In *Working Paper*. Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Harvard Business School.

Laursen, K. & Salter, A., 2006. Open for innovation: The role of
openness in explaining innovation performance among U.K. manufacturing
firms. *Strategic Management Journal*, 27, p.131—150.

Lichtenthaler, U. & Lichtenthaler, E., 2009. A capability-based
framework for open innovation: Complementing absorptive capacity.
*Journal of Management Studies*, 46(8), p.1315—1338.

Malone, T.W., Laubacher, R.J. & Johns, T., 2011. The Big Idea: The Age
of Hyperspecialization. *Harvard Business Review*, July-August 2011.
Available at:
<http://hbr.org/2011/07/the-big-idea-the-age-of-hyperspecialization/ar/1>.

Marks, P., 2012. Unused inventions get a crowdsourced creative spark.
*NewScientist Magazine*, 2876. Available at:
<http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21528766.000-unused-inventions-get-a-crowdsourced-creative-spark.html>.

Murray, F. & O’Mahony, S., 2007. Exploring the Foundations of Cumulative
Innovation: Implications for Organization Science. *Organization
Science*, 18(6), pp.1006–1021. doi:10.1287/orsc.1070.0325.

Nielsen, M.A., 2012. *Reinventing discovery: the new era of networked
science*, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Schuler, D. & Namioka, A., 1993. *Participatory design: principles and
practices*, Hillsdale, N.J: L. Erlbaum Associates.

Tapscott, D. & Williams, A.D., 2006. *Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration
Changes Everything*, New York, USA: Portfolio.

Wessel, D., 2007. Prizes for Solutions to Problems Play Valuable Role in
Innovation. *The Wall Street Journal*. Available at:
<http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB116968486074286927-7z_a6JoHM_hf4kdePUFZEdJpAMI_20070201.html>.

[^1]: Human Genome Project Information:

[^2]: Human Genome Project Information - About the Human Genome Project: <http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/project/about.shtml>

[^3]: The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) Consortium: <http://genome.ucsc.edu/ENCODE>

[^4]: National Human Genome Research Institute: <http://www.genome.gov/10005107>

[^5]: Scientific American: <http://www.scientificamerican.com/citizen-science>

[^6]: ARTigo: <http://www.artigo.org/about.html>

[^7]: One Billion Minds: <http://onebillionminds.com/start>
