---
layout: post
title: "The Public Knowledge Project: Open Source Tools for Open Access to Scholarly Communication"
modified_date: 2 March 2014
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8_11
authors:
 - name: James MacGregor
 - name: Kevin Stranack
   orcid: 0000-0001-8790-427X
 - name: John Willinsky
   orcid: 0000-0001-6192-8687
categories: [tools]
tags: [publishing, open access]
abstract: |
 This chapter describes how the Public Knowledge Project, a collective of
 academics, librarians, and technical genies, has been, since 1998, building
 open source software (free) publishing platforms that create an alternative
 path to commercial and subscription-based routes to scholarly communication.
 It sets out how its various website platforms, including Open Journal Systems,
 Open Conference Systems, and, recently, Open Monograph Press, provide a guided
 path through the editorial workflow of submission, review, editing, publishing
 and indexing. Thousands of faculty members around the world are now using the
 software to publish independent journals on a peer-reviewed and open access
 basis, greatly increasing the public and global contribution of research and
 scholarship.
---

## Introduction

The digital transformation of scholarly communication has given rise to
a wealth of new publishing strategies, models, ands tool over the last
two decades. Many of these developments revolve around this new
technology’s seeming promise to increase the extent and reach of
knowledge dissemination on a more equitable and global scale (cf.
Benkler 2006). At first reluctantly, but now with increasing levels of
interest, scholarly publishing is turning to the Internet as the
preferred method of dissemination. This poses a set of core challenges:
How can scholars, regardless of geographic location or institutional
resources, participate in, learn from, and contribute to the global
exchange of knowledge? How can those involved in publishing scholarly
work maintain high standards of quality for this work, while further
advancing the long-standing research goals of openness and increased
access to knowledge?

The responses to such challenges are prolific and growing, proving to be
source of exciting research and development for scholarly communication.
The whole arena is complicated by the mix of, on the one hand, large
corporate publishing entities, seeking to preserve some of the highest
profit margins in publishing, and, on the other, small independent
scholar-publishers who see their work as a service to their colleagues
and a commitment to the pursuit of learning, while in the middle are
scholarly associations that have grown dependent over the years on
publishing revenues for their survival (cf. Willinsky 2009).

Within this larger picture, the Public Knowledge Project (PKP)
represents a modest instance of research and experimentation in a new
generation of publishing tools that would lower the barriers among
scholars and scientists interested in playing a more active role in
publishing and in seeing this work reaching a much wider audience. What
success the project has achieved over the years in developing software
that is used by journals in many different parts of the world can be
attributed to the collective wisdom, as well as trial and error, of the
team involved in this project. This wisdom has found its expression in,
for example, the early adoption of open source and community development
models; the active development of the international PKP community; and
the feedback of users in guiding software and workflow design decisions
that reflected principles of simplicity, interoperability,
accessibility, and openness, without sacrificing capability.

## History of the Project

The Public Knowledge Project was started at the University of British
Columbia (UBC) in Vancouver, Canada in 1998 with a small number of
student developers working under the direction of John Willinsky, a
faculty member in the Faculty of Education. The project began on two
levels. It was involved in researching various models for creating a
more coordinated approach to scholarly publishing that would increase
its public value (cf. Willinsky 1999). It also sought to develop
something practical and useful, in the form of online software, for the
journal community, which was only beginning, at the turn of the
twenty-first century, to think about moving its publishing operations
and its journals to a web-based environment. The project’s goal from the
outset was to find ways of increasing public and global access to
research and scholarship. As such, it was an early participant in the
open access movement that sought to develop ways of creating
peer-reviewed journals that did not charge readers for access to their
content (cf. Suber 2012).

In 2005, Willinsky led PKP into a partnership with Lynn Copeland and
Brian Owen at the Simon Fraser University (SFU) Library. It was becoming
clear that the research library was emerging as a key player in efforts
to reform scholarly communication around technology. And SFU Library
quickly demonstrated how productively this sort of partnership could
work, by providing management and systems support. In 2007, Willinsky
left UBC to take up a position at Stanford University in the Graduate
School of Education, creating a strong institutional link for the
project between Stanford and the SFU Library, with a greater emphasis at
Stanford on the related research questions in scholarly communications,
while matters of technology development and innovation are centered
around the SFU Library.

As for PKP’s software, an early result of the project was the creation
and 2001 release of Open Journal Systems (OJS) 1.0, a free, open source
journal publication management system, which provided an online platform
for accepting submissions, performing double blind peer review, editing,
publishing, and dissemination. OJS provided the necessary technological
infrastructure for many journals making the transition from print to
online, as well as being the foundation for emerging “born-digital”
journals. Today, PKP has not only created OJS, but also Open Conference
Systems (OCS, for managing conferences), Open Monograph Press (OMP, for
managing book publication), and Open Harvester Systems (OHS, for
metadata harvesting).

The Project currently employs over a dozen developers, librarians and
library staff at Simon Fraser University, Stanford University, and
elsewhere in the world. Most are active academically as students and/or
as scholars. There is no physical PKP “office”: while most PKP
associates live in Vancouver, others live in New Brunswick, Palo Alto,
Brazil, and elsewhere. As with other open source software initiatives,
community collaboration is at the forefront of the PKP development
model, and the PKP user community continues to grow and influence
application development.

To take one community example, the PKP Support Forum has over 4,500 members and more than 33,000 posts, and generates upwards of ten
new posts a day; many of these posts contain vital bug reports and
feature requests.[^1]

Translation support across all PKP applications is growing: OJS alone
now includes 27 community-contributed translations. And the global
install base of PKP applications expands from month to month, with over
3,500 active journals currently using OJS. Half of these titles are
edited and published in developing countries. Close to 90 percent of the
titles publish open access editions, with very few charging article
processing fees. Their secret is operating on very low-overhead and
obtaining some measure of institutional support (cf. Edgar & Willinsky
2010).

In both its research and development initiatives, PKP continues to be
funded, as it was originally, by a range of different government and
foundation grants.[^2] In 2012, however, PKP introduced two new funding
models to ensure its sustainability, which involved growing
responsibilities around the expanded number of journals and conferences
dependent on its software. The two models involved, first of all,
strengthening PKP’s hosting services for journals and conferences using
its free software, and, secondly, the creation of an institutional
sponsorship program for research libraries, many of which were now
providing PKP software to their institutions.

On the hosting side, what was once a fledgling, ad-hoc initiative at
Simon Fraser University Library to mount journals was established as a
distinct venture, dubbed PKP Publishing Services (PKP|PS).[^3]

The growth and professionalization of PKP|PS has required a deeper level
of commitment to infrastructure: hardware, network uptime, and software
management across hundreds of installed instances of OJS, OCS and OMP.
PKP|PS currently hosts over 200 journals and conferences (with a small
number of OMP instances on the way), and now acts as a significant
funding resource for PKP, not to mention a critical vector for feedback
from invested, informed, and day-to-day users of the software.

Perhaps more significant for giving PKP a stronger institutional base,
however, is its sponsorship program, which has now over 30 participating
institutions.[^4]

Interested research libraries can sponsor the project directly on an
annual basis, or can become more involved as development partners.
Development partners are just that: they have access to the core PKP
development team and are deeply involved in long-term technical and
administrative planning. This represents a new model for PKP, which has
traditionally been a very small and tight-knit group of developers.
Opening the team to a larger community is not without its challenges in
coordinating the work among different teams and locations. It is
important to stress here, however, that this isn’t simply a solution to
PKP’s financial problem. The sponsorship program provides a venue for
PKP to interact with the larger scholarly community in a way that
previously did not exist. It is an open invitation to participate as a
patron and a peer in this project, and the investment of participation
is equally if not more important to the fundamental goals of the project
as any financial contribution.

## The PKP Systems

In introducing the operating principles at work in PKP’s software, we
are focusing on the themes of simplicity and interoperability that
underlie are approach to supporting the managers, editors, authors,
reviewers, copyeditors, layout designers, and proofreaders, among others
involved in the workflow that defines scholarly publishing. Our goal has
always been to build systems that are not simply free to use, but are
easier to use to do the quality work that those in scholarly publishing
has always involved. We have sought to build systems that not only
support the workflow that results in a sharing of research but that are
instructive and informative around the standards that have historically
developed around these practices, so that others who have not been
previously part of the scholarly publishing community could begin to
participate and contribute, as they were walked through the process by
the software design. We have, in this process, pursued a number of holy
grails, among them, the design of intuitive systems and the production
of automated systems. We continue down this path, not without our Monty
Python moments, having realized that scholarly publishing is not an
inherently intuitive process nor one that can be readily automated. We
have reduced the clerical tasks and greatly increased the portability of
the editorial office, and a good deal more than that, of course, as we
outline in what follows.

### (a) Simplicity in Technical Administration

All PKP application system requirements are both *low* and *broad*: all
that is needed to run OJS, OCS or OMP is a web server running PHP and a
common database system (MySQL or PostgreSQL). PKP also actively supports
older versions of PHP, MySQL and PostgreSQL, out of consideration for
users who may not have access to newer technology. Users who download
and install PKP applications are often definitively non-technical, and
so special care has been taken to ensure that the installation and
maintenance processes and documentation is easy to understand and
uncomplicated. The installation process is straightforward and can be
accomplished in a matter of minutes. Application maintenance, including
backing up files and general upkeep, is also simple and well documented.
After installing OJS, OCS or OMP, the site administrator can create one
or more journal, conference or press instance on the site. Each instance
takes only a second to create; after they have been created, separate
journal managers can be enrolled in each instance, and these journal
managers subsequently take over day-to-day administration tasks.

### (b) Simplicity in Management

After the journal, conference or press has been created, the manager
completes a guided setup process where all core components related to
publishing workflow, author and submission management, guidelines
(author, reviewer, editing, etc.), publishing, indexing, and the look
and feel of the site are configured. (In OJS, the setup is a five-step
process; in OCS, it is a six-step process; in OMP the process is a bit
more extensive, with separate setup steps for press, website,
publication, distribution and user management; there is an initial
wizard available for quick press configuration, however.)

This stepwise workflow has been created and adhered to with different
goals in mind. For the new manager, these workflows provide a guided
tour through many of the options they must consider before they publish:
OJS includes prompts for ISSN information and a publication schedule,
for example, while OMP provides comprehensive series and category
configuration options. For the experienced manager, these setup options
are easily and centrally accessible for periodic review.

This isn’t a case of “simple is as simple does,” however. A great deal
of behind-the-scenes automation and task/service management is included
in OCS, OJS and OMP, and all three applications offer far more
capability than may be assumed from their relatively straightforward
configuration processes. Most of these services involve promoting
accessibility and visibility of the journal’s published content on the
web. For example, Google Scholar requires article information to be
available to its web crawlers in very specific ways; OJS does this
automatically, with no further configuration needed.[^5]

### (c) Simplicity of Submission

Each application’s submission process has been refined to be as simple
as possible for new and experienced authors alike. Each application uses
a multi-step submission process (no more than five steps in any
application). Each step serves a specific purpose, from informing the
author of any copyright or other requirements; to providing submission
indexing metadata; to requesting submission and/or supplementary files;
to confirming the submission. Authors are aware at all times of which
step they are on, and what is needed of them. This process ensures that
all information relevant to the submission is gathered at the very
beginning, saving editors valuable time during later stages.

### (d) Simplicity of Review

While implementations differ as required by the publishing format, all
three applications approach review and editing workflows in a
philosophically similar way. Peer review is the key quality control for
scholarly communication, as well as a source of improvement for this
work. The review process, in particular for reviewers, must be kept as
simple and quick as possible, as reviewers often have the least
incentive to use the system and may balk at any impediment between
themselves and the review proper. Typically, in the review process, the
reviewer needs to agree to complete the review; download the submission
files; and upload review comments and/or review files to the system.
Reviewers may log in directly to the system to complete the review
process, or editors may act on their behalf. To assist editors in
selecting reviewers, the system tracks a reviewers previous record on
areas of interest, time taken, number of reviews, and editor rating.

### (e) Simplicity of Editing and Production

All three systems handle editing differently. OCS includes a relatively
minor editing step only if full paper submissions are being accepted by
the conference, whereas OJS and OMP both have full-scale editing
workflows which can include input from copyeditors, proofreaders, layout
editors, and others. In the case of OMP, editing and production
workflows are handled separately: copyediting of final draft files are
handled in an editing stage, and the creation of production-ready files
(eBooks, PDFs, and so on) and the completion of all catalog information
for that particular manuscript are managed in a final production stage.

## The PKP Program

### (a) Enhancing Interoperability

The PKP development team actively pursues software interoperability with
different applications, frameworks and platforms where appropriate.
Interoperability is ideally facilitated via open, widely used and
time-tested APIs, standards and protocols. A number of interoperability
standards common to the library and scholarly publishing worlds have
enjoyed a long history of support within PKP, and support for new
standards is added regularly (and in many cases in the form of
contributed plugins from the larger community).

Various information interchange mechanisms enjoy broad support across
the PKP applications. All three applications support the Open Archives
Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH), which provides
machine access to published article (or book, or presentation) metadata
for the use of indexing systems. Another source of interoperability
comes from following XML standards, particularly journal publishing
standards such as the National Library of Medicine (NLM) Journal
Publishing Tag Set, have proven crucial to PKP’s efforts to provide
open, structured access to published scholarly content. XML is
particularly well-suited to sharing data and metadata online between
applications, as it is human- and machine-readable.

Other discrete interoperability projects are currently underway. PKP is
partnering with the Dataverse Network initiative at Harvard to develop a
set of plugins that will provide deposit and display functionality
between OJS and Dataverse repositories.[^6] At the same time, the
project is also working with the Public Library of Science (PLoS) to
provide Altmetrics[^7] for PKP applications, and with [ORCID](http://about.orcid.org/) to provide
author disambiguation services.[^8] These services are usually
implemented as plugins, and allow different levels of access to data and
metadata for different online services and platforms, typically with
very little needed in terms of additional setup. Most importantly
however, the service standards and protocols are open, understood, and
widely accepted throughout the scholarly and academic library
communities, ensuring a broad level of support and interoperability for
PKP applications.

### (b) Enhancing Accessibility

PKP promotes access to scholarly content in a number of ways.
Interoperability via open standards and services, discussed above, is of
key importance to accessibility: providing multiple access methods to
content will of course increase exposure. In this fashion, journals may
have their content harvested by OAI-capable metadata harvesters, can
provide article DOI information to CrossRef, can deposit into PubMed’s
MEDLINE indexing service.[^9] All PKP applications are
search-engine-friendly, and include special HTML “meta” tags that are
used by Google Scholar to identify and present content properly. In
addition, the application’s HTML is written to specific standards, and
special care is taken to ensure general accessibility across a wide
variety of browsers and operating system.

### (c) Enhancing Openness

#### Open Source Software

PKP software applications have always been released as open source
software, under the General Public License.[^10]

The software is free in two ways: It is free to download and use; and
the source code is freely available to download, view, and modify. There
are a number of reasons why PKP publishes these applications as open
source software.

Firstly, our mandate to improve the access to and quality of scholarly
research has been helped immensely by providing the software free of
charge: Researchers from all over the world can download and use our
software; in a very real sense, journals from Indonesia and Sri Lanka
can operate on the same field (or quality of platform) as journals from
the United States and Germany.

Secondly, our software has benefitted immeasurably from source code
contributions from many, many members of the scholarly community. Almost
all translations of the software have been contributed as code; bugs
have been identified and in many cases fixed by community members; and
new features (many in plugin format) have been contributed as well.
Simply put, we would not have been able to attain the quality and
breadth of our software without following an open source software
community model.

Thirdly, while Open Access to scholarly research and open source
software models are not necessarily explicitly interlinked, they do
share some of the same philosophical underpinnings: open access to
material; community collaboration; etc. Following an open Source
licensing model makes as much sense as promoting an open access approach
to scholarly research and to open science, more generally (cf. Willinsky
2005).

#### Open Community

PKP is a community project in many ways. The Project provides direct
developer access to anyone, via the PKP support forums and wiki. Anyone
can register on the forum and interact directly with the PKP development
team for technical support or development inquiries. The support forum
also exists as an active venue for questions and conversations from
editors, with questions ranging from accessibility, indexing and DOIs to
how typical review and editorial workflows typically work.

This community engagement is international. PKP seeks to cooperate with
different community partners around the world (including translators,
developers, and supportive institutions in Europe, Africa, Latin
America, China, and elsewhere). PKP has worked with INASP and other
organizations in delivering scholarly publishing workshops in many parts
of the world. It was worked with INASP to build portals such as African
Journals Online and [Asia Journals Online](http://asiajol.info/), which have created an online
presence in Google Scholar and elsewhere for hundreds of title.[^11] In
addition, many independent user and training groups have popped up
throughout the world, operating without direct PKP support—for example,
one partner in Spain has developed an entire OJS training program and
support forum, while another, with [IBICT](http://ibict.br/) in Brasilia has been offering
workshops across the country for years*.*[^12] That these community
initiatives are blossoming internationally, and largely without direct
support from PKP, is a welcome marker of success, and an indication of
the broad acceptance of PKP software as a scholarly publishing standard
internationally.

#### Open Access

A key goal of PKP is to promote open access to scholarly research. As
such it is part of growing open access movement. Open Access was
initially, at the turn of the century, a radical challenge to the old
print model, but it is now increasingly embraced not just by small
independent scholar-publishers, where it got its start, but by the
largest of scholarly publishing corporations, just as it is being
supported by government legislation requiring open access for funded
research, with every sign that open access may well become the norm for
publishing research (cf. Laakso & Björk 2012; Björk & Peatau 2012). With
the development of mega-journals, such as *PLoS One* publishing tens of
thousands of open access articles a year, and increasing use of “article
processing fees” to guarantee that open access can be a source of
revenue, the momentum and incentive is transforming the industry (cf.
Frank 2012). While PKP continues to largely serve smaller open access
journals operated by scholar-publishers, efforts are underway to adapt
its approach to make the mega-journal model among the options that it
offers to the academic community.

#### Open Education

One of the challenges for sustaining, enhancing, and increasing open
access is lack of professional publishing experience among many in the
growing community. A new initiative of PKP is the development of
tuition-free, open, online training courses in the use of PKP software
and online publishing and management skills.[^13] Working in conjunction
with partners such as the International Network for the Availability of
Scientific Publications (INASP) and the Publishing Studies Department at
Kwame Nkrumah University Of Science and Technology ([KNUST](http://knust.edu.gh/pages/)) in Ghana,
this new education program will help build local capacity for online
publishing and sustainable open access.[^14]

### (d) Enhancing Knowledge

The fundamental purpose of the Public Knowledge Project is to enhance
the quality of scholarly communication and global knowledge sharing. By
providing free and open source tools for professional monograph,
journal, and conference management, PKP has enabled scholars from around
the world to launch their own online publications with little or no
money, and to build scholarly communities around their areas of
interest, and to share the results of their research with all (cf.
Willinsky & Mendis 2007).

Discussions of the developing world and open access often revolve around
making research from the leading publications from the developed world
more widely available. Programs such as HINARI, AGORA, and OARE have
made significant gains in this area.[^15] While this is no doubt
important, it is equally important for researchers in the developed
world (and elsewhere) to hear the voices from the South. In the past, a
leading publisher may have rejected the knowledge generated by a
Ghanaian researcher because the significance of her work was not
understood or valued. She could instead publish it in a local
print-based research publication, but it would have a very limited
readership, with physical copies not making it far beyond her country’s
borders. With the increasing availability of the Internet in Africa,
although still a challenge, and the existence of free and open source
tools for professional publishing, she has new options. Locally produced
online journals, with a global community of editors, authors, and
reviewers are increasingly available as a forum for her work, and where
a suitable local option doesn’t exist, she can now choose to collaborate
with colleagues to start her own online journal.

## Conclusion

The Public Knowledge Project has worked hard with a good number of
organizations and institutions, editors and publishers, over the course
of the last decade-and- a-half to increase the options and alternatives
available to the global community of scholars and researchers. In the
face of this new publishing medium that has transformed so many aspects
of communication, and with even more changes clearly in the offing, it
is too early to know or even predict what models and methods are going
to prevail as the digital era of scholarly communication continues to
unfold. Our project has always been to demonstrate ways in which these
new directions and opportunities might uphold long-standing historical
principles of openness, community, cooperation, experimentation, and
questioning that continue to underwrite the work of research and
learning. The continuing success of this work relies not only on the
open nature of the project, but on the passion and interests of this
larger community in their desire to contribute ideas and knowledge, as
well as the always appreciated instances of well-formed code.

## References

Benkler, Y., 2006. *The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
Transforms Markets and Freedom*, New Haven, USA: Yale University Press.
Available at: <http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/wealth_of_networks/>.

Björk, B.-C. & Paetau, P., 2012. Open access to the scientific journal
literature - status and challenges for the information systems
community. *Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology*, 38(5), pp.39–44. [doi:10.1002/bult.2012.1720380512](http://10.1002/bult.2012.1720380512).

Edgar, B.D. & Willinsky, J., 2010. A survey of scholarly journals using
Open Journal System. *Scholarly and Research Communication*, 1(2).
Available at: <http://src-online.ca/index.php/src/article/view/24/41>.

Frank, 2012. Megajournals. *Trading Knowledge*. Available at:
<http://occamstypewriter.org/trading-knowledge/2012/07/09/megajournals/>.

Laakso, M. & Björk, B.-C., 2012. Anatomy of open access publishing: a
study of longitudinal development and internal structure. *BMC
Medicine*, 10(1), p.124. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-10-124](http://10.1186/1741-7015-10-124.

Suber, P. ed., 2012. What is Open Access? In *Open Access*.
Massachusetts, USA: MIT Press, pp. 1–27.

Willinsky, J., 1999. *Technologies of knowing: a proposal for the human
sciences*, Boston, Mass.: Beacon Press.

Willinsky, J., 2006. *The access principle: the case for open access to
research and scholarship*, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Willinsky, J., 2009. The stratified economics of open access. *Economic
Analysis and Policy*, 39(1), pp.53–70.

Willinsky, J., 2005. The unacknowledged convergence of open source, open
access, and open science. *First Monday*, 10(8). Available at:
<http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1265/1185>.

Willinsky, J. & Mendis, R., 2007. Open access on a zero budget: a case
study of Postcolonial Text. *Information Research*, 12(3). Available at:
<http://www.aughty.org/pdf/postcolonial_text.pdf>.


[^1]: PKP: [http](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[://](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[pkp](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[.](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[sfu](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[.](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[ca](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[/](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[support](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[/](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)[forum](http://pkp.sfu.ca/support/forum)

[^2]: PKP Funding Partners: [http](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[://](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[pkp](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[.](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[sfu](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[.](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[ca](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[/](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[funding](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[\_](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)[partners](http://pkp.sfu.ca/funding_partners)

[^3]: PKP Publishing Services: [http](http://pkpservices.sfu.ca/)[://](http://pkpservices.sfu.ca/)[pkpservices](http://pkpservices.sfu.ca/)[.](http://pkpservices.sfu.ca/)[sfu](http://pkpservices.sfu.ca/)[.](http://pkpservices.sfu.ca/)[ca](http://pkpservices.sfu.ca/)

[^4]: PKP Sponsorships: [http](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)[://](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)[pkp](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)[.](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)[sfu](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)[.](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)[ca](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)[/](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)[sponsorships](http://pkp.sfu.ca/sponsorships)

[^5]: See Google Scholar: [http](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[://](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[scholar](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[.](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[google](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[.](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[ca](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[/](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[intl](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[/](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[en](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[/](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[scholar](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[/](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[inclusion](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[.](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)[html](http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html)

[^6]: Dataverse Network. [http](http://thedata.org/)[://](http://thedata.org/)[thedata](http://thedata.org/)[.](http://thedata.org/)[org](http://thedata.org/)

[^7]: PLOS Article-Level Metrics: <http://article-level-metrics.plos.org/alm-info/>

[^8]: Altmetrics: [http](http://www.altmetric.com/)[://](http://www.altmetric.com/)[www](http://www.altmetric.com/)[.](http://www.altmetric.com/)[altmetric](http://www.altmetric.com/)[.](http://www.altmetric.com/)[com](http://www.altmetric.com/)[/](http://www.altmetric.com/)

[^9]: CrossRef: [http](http://www.crossref.org/)[://](http://www.crossref.org/)[www](http://www.crossref.org/)[.](http://www.crossref.org/)[crossref](http://www.crossref.org/)[.](http://www.crossref.org/)[org](http://www.crossref.org/)[/](http://www.crossref.org/)

[^10]: Specifically, the GPL V2. See GBU Betriebssystem: [http](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[://](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[www](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[.](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[gnu](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[.](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[org](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[/](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[licenses](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[/](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[gpl](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[-2.0.](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)[html](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html).

[^11]: African Journals Online: [http](http://www.ajol.info/)[://](http://www.ajol.info/)[www](http://www.ajol.info/)[.](http://www.ajol.info/)[ajol](http://www.ajol.info/)[.](http://www.ajol.info/)[info](http://www.ajol.info/)[/](http://www.ajol.info/)

[^12]: OJS.es: [http](http://www.ojs.es/)[://](http://www.ojs.es/)[www](http://www.ojs.es/)[.](http://www.ojs.es/)[ojs](http://www.ojs.es/)[.](http://www.ojs.es/)[es](http://www.ojs.es/)[/](http://www.ojs.es/);

[^13]: PKP School: [http](http://pkpschool.org/)[://](http://pkpschool.org/)[pkpschool](http://pkpschool.org/)[.](http://pkpschool.org/)[org](http://pkpschool.org/)

[^14]: INASP: [http](http://www.inasp.info/)[://](http://www.inasp.info/)[www](http://www.inasp.info/)[.](http://www.inasp.info/)[inasp](http://www.inasp.info/)[.](http://www.inasp.info/)[info](http://www.inasp.info/)[/](http://www.inasp.info/)

[^15]: Research4Life: [http](http://www.research4life.org/)[://](http://www.research4life.org/)[www](http://www.research4life.org/)[.](http://www.research4life.org/)[research](http://www.research4life.org/)[4](http://www.research4life.org/)[life](http://www.research4life.org/)[.](http://www.research4life.org/)[org](http://www.research4life.org/)[/](http://www.research4life.org/)
