---
layout: post
title: "Science Caught Flat-footed: How Academia Struggles with Open Science Communication"
modified_date: 19 January 2014
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8_4
authors:
 - name: Alexander Gerber
category: basics_background
abstract: |
 As high as the potential of Web 2.0 might be, the European academia, compared
 to that of the US, mostly reacts hesitantly at best to these new
 opportunities. Interestingly enough this scepticism applies even more to
 science communication than to scientific practice itself. The author shows
 that the supposed technological challenge is actually a cultural one. Thus
 possible solutions do not primarily lie in the tools or in the strategies used
 to apply them, but in the adaptation of the systemic frameworks of
 knowledge-creation and dissemination as we have practised them for decades, if
 not centuries. Permeating an ‘Open Science Communication’ (OSC) under closed
 paradigms can only succeed if foremost the embedding frameworks are adapted.
 This will include new forms of impact measurement, recognition, and
 qualification, and not only obvious solutions from the archaic toolbox of
 enlightenment and dissemination. The author also illustrates the causes,
 effects, and solutions for this cultural change with empirical data.
---

> Change happens by listening and then starting a dialogue with the
people who are doing something you don't believe is right.
<small>Jane Goodall, British ethologist and a devoted science communicator</small>

The swan song of what was meant to be an era of “Public Understanding of
Science and Humanities” (PUSH) rings rather dissonantly today, given the
wailing chorus of disorientation, if not existential fear, intoned by
science communicators across Europe. Almost 30 years after the
game-changing Bodmer report (Royal Society 1985), another paradigmatic
shift is taking place, probably even more radical than any of the
transitions during the previous four eras (Trench & Bucchi 2010; Gerber
2012). This fifth stage of science communication is being predominantly
driven by interactive online media. Let us examine this from the same
perspectives which the very definition of “science communication” as an
umbrella-term also comprises of: 1. the communication about science, and
2. the communication by scientists and their institutionalised PR with
different publics.

##Communication about Science

Journalists are witnessing a widespread disintegration of mass media
outlets and their underlying business models. In terms of circulation
and advertising revenue, this demise may not be as abrupt as in the U.S.
(see Figure 1), but is surely just as devastating for popular science
publishers in Europe, and consequently their staff and freelancers in
the long run (Gerber 2011). Geoff Brumfiel (2009) was among the first
scholars to make the scientific community aware of the extent of the
science journalism crisis, quoting blatant analyses by experienced
editors, such as Robert Lee Hotz from The Wall Street Journal:
“Independent science coverage is not just endangered, it’s dying” (p.
275). Afflicted by low salaries and even lower royalties from a
decreasing number of potential outlets, science journalism is
additionally (or maybe consequently) suffering from a continuous
decrease in credibility.

![**Figure 1**. The business models of traditional print journalism in the
U.S. have eroded remarkably fast: the industry has lost as much market
share in five years as they had gained in the 50 years before. The
disintegration of mass media outlets in terms of circulation and
advertising revenue may not be as abrupt in Europe as it is in the U.S.
Nonetheless, popular science publishers in Europe are also heavily under
pressure.](/images/science_caught_flat_footed.jpg)

![**Figure 2**. Who is most appropriate to explain the impact of science upon
society? Less than one out of five Europeans nowadays name journalists,
and the numbers are constantly decreasing (light grey: 2010, dark grey:
2005). In fact, a majority expects the scientists themselves to deliver
their messages directly. Interactive online media offer new
opportunities to do exactly that.](/images/science_caught_flat_footed_2.png)

Questioned about who is most appropriate to explain the impact of
science upon society, only 16–20 % of Europeans nowadays name
journalists—a further decrease from 25–32 % five years before (see
Figure 2). In fact, a majority expects the scientists themselves to
deliver their messages directly: 63 %, increasing from 52 % five years
earlier (European Commission 2010). Unfortunately, it has not yet been
investigated properly as to what extent this credibility also (or
particularly) extends over the science blogosphere and other online
platforms, or whether interactive online media have even been catalysts,
and not just enabling technologies, in this development.

Every discourse or effort to reinvent journalism regarding media
economics (e.g. crowdfunding), investigation methods (e.g. data-driven
journalism in the deep web), formats (e.g. slide casts), and
distribution (e.g. content curation) almost inevitably seems to circle
around interactive online media. Obviously the web is not only seen as
the main cause of the crisis, but also as the main opportunity for
innovations to solve it.

On the other hand, one could also argue that due to an increasing number
of popular science formats on television, science journalism now reaches
a much wider audience as compared to print publications which have
always merely catered to a small fraction of society. Especially on TV,
however, we as communication scholars should be wary of the distorted
image of science reflected by conventional mass media. Coverage and
content are mostly limited to either the explanation of phenomena in
everyday life (“Why can’t I whip cream with a washing machine?”) or
supposed success stories (“Scientists have finally found a cure for
Cooties”). Thereby journalism neither succeeds in depicting the ‘big
science picture’ of policy, ethics, and economics holistically, nor the
real complexity of a knowledge-creation process authentically, which is
everything but linear, being a process in which knowledge is permanently
being contradicted or falsified, and is therefore never final.

However, the notion of what the essence of science really is could
perfectly well be vulgarised through web technologies, in the sense of
making the different steps within this process of knowledge-creation
transparent, for instance by means of a continuous blog or other
messaging or sharing platforms. Yet there are still only very few
examples for such formats (see below), and they are particularly sparse
in journalism.

The tendency to reduce science to supposed success stories is certainly
also a result of its mediatisation, i.e. science and science policies
reacting and adapting to the mass media logic by which it is
increasingly being shaped and framed (Krotz 2007; Fuller 2010; Weingart
2005). This brings us to the second dimension of science communication.

## Communication by Scientists and the Institutionalised PR

Self-critical scholars as well as practitioners of science communication
wonder how far we have effectively come since 1985, when the Royal
Society envisioned a public which would understand “more of the scope
and the limitations, the findings and the methods of science”. Even then
the “most urgent message” went to the scientists themselves: “Learn to
communicate with the public, […] and consider it your duty” (The Royal
Society 1985, p. 24).

Almost 30 years later the resources for institutionalised science PR and
marketing have multiplied remarkably. Compared to the early 90s when
professional communicators were rare exceptions, there is hardly a
single university or institute left today without a communication
department. Larger institutions employ up to 70 full-time communicators
in the meantime. Yet less than one out of ten citizens in Europe
actually show any interest whatsoever in science centres, public
lectures, or science fairs (European Commission 2010, see Figure
3)—albeit with a blanket coverage across the continent. Such obvious
contrasts between the supply and demand of certain formats make science
an easy prey for critics arguing that its communication is inherently
elitist. At least the often misinterpreted decrease in naïve trust in
science—66 % in 2010 compared to 78 % in 2005 (European Commission
2010)—is an encouraging sign of an increasingly critical public (Bauer
2009).

![**Figure 3**. Presumably as a direct result of mediatisation in the era of
PUSH, the so-called “myth of science”, the naïve trust in science being
able to solve any problem, has decreased significantly. In some
countries like Germany (inner pie) this trust is even lower than the
European average. This development is often misinterpreted as a problem.
It should instead be seen as an encouraging sign of an increasingly
critical public.](/images/science_caught_flat_footed_3.png)

PR professionals have been ‘PUSH-trained’, so to speak, to focus on the
dissemination of research results, ideally in the form of a well-told
success story, as described above, and thereby significantly contribute
to the distorted media image of scientific reality. Unfortunately just
now that science, at least on an institutional level, seems to have come
to terms with the mechanisms of mass media; PR and marketing are being
shattered by a seismic shift towards a horizontalisation of
communication better known as social media. Particularly the new
media-savvy student generations have an entirely different understanding
of how the relevant information should ‘find them’. Even most
communication scholars are still amazed of the pace of this transition.
In countries like Germany, for instance, the Internet overtook
television two years ago in terms of activated and structured demand for
information, i.e. the medium of choice to look for quality
information—an increase from 13 % in 2000 to 59 % in 2011 (IfD
Allensbach 2011).

Unanimously most studies show, however, that science has as of yet
largely avoided adapting both its communication efforts and its own
media usage to the above mentioned changes in the information behaviour
of laypeople (Procter et al. 2010; Bader et al. 2012; Allgaier et al.
2013). In a web technology use and needs analysis Gerber (2012; 2013)
showed that the use of even the most common online tools is still a
niche phenomenon in the scientific community. Furthermore, the few
well-known tools were also the ones to be the most categorically
rejected, e.g. Twitter by 80.5 % of the respondents.

Yet the diffusion of Web 2.0 tools in academia is only partly a question
of technology acceptance. For instance, online communication is still
not taken into account in most cases of evaluation or allocation of
research funding. Most experts in a Delphi study on science
communication (Gerber 2011) therefore demand a critical discourse about
possible incentives for scientists. If online outreach, however, became
a relevant criterion for academic careers, we would also have to find
more empirically sound ways to measure, compare, or even standardise and
audit the impact of such an outreach. Approaches like ‘Altmetrics’ are
promising but still in a conceptual phase. At least for another few
years we will therefore have to deal with a widening gap between the
masses of scientists communicating “ordinarily”, on the one hand, and
the very few cutting edge researchers and (mostly large and renowned)
institutions experimenting extensively with the new opportunities, on
the other. Thus the threat of increasing the already existing imbalances
between scientific disciplines is just as evident as the opportunities
for increasing transparency, flattening hierarchies, or even digitally
democratizing the system itself, as sometimes hyperventilated by Open
Science evangelists.

We must not forget that technologies only set the framework, whereas the
real challenges and solutions for an ‘Open Science Communication’ are
deeply rooted in scientific culture and the system of knowledge creation
itself (Gerber 2012). Much will, therefore, depend upon the willingness
of policy makers to actively steer the system in a certain direction.
Yet they also have to reconsider whether they thereby risk fostering
(even unintentionally) the above mentioned distortion of scientific
practice. The ultimate challenge lies in balancing incentives and
regulations, on the one hand, with the inevitable effect of a further
mediatisation of science, on the other, since both remain two sides of
the same coin.

Public relations and science marketing professionals will keep
struggling with the increasing ‘loss of control’ as long as they hang on
to their traditional paradigm of dissemination. An increasing number of
social media policies in academia shows that the institutions have
realised the challenges that they are facing in terms of governance. By
accepting ‘deinstitutionalisation’ and involving individual scientists
as authentic and highly credible ambassadors (see above), PR can make
the most essential step away from the old paradigm to the new
understanding of Open Science Communication (OSC).

The common ground for both above mentioned trends—the
‘deprofessionalisation’ of science journalism and the
‘deinstitutionalisation’ of science communication at large—is the
remarkable amount of laypersons finding their voices online and the
self-conception of civil society organisations demanding to be involved
in the science communication process. As much as this inevitably
shatters the economic base of science journalism and as much as it may
force the science establishment to reinvent its communication practice,
we should be grateful for the degree of communication from ‘scientific
citizens’. Thereby the challenge lies less in permitting (or even
embracing) bottom-up movements as such, but rather more in resisting the
use of public dialogue as a means to an end. While valorising ‘citizen
science’ as an overdue ‘co-production’ of authoritative social
knowledge, Fuller warns us not to treat broadcasts of consensus
conferences, citizen juries, etc. simply as ''“better or worse
amplifiers for the previously repressed forms of ‘local knowledge’
represented by the citizens who are now allowed to share the spotlight
with the scientists and policy makers.” ''(2010, p. 292)

The questionable success of most of these public engagement campaigns
has increasingly been challenged recently. Grassroots initiatives like
‘Wissenschaftsdebatte’ or ‘Forschungswende’ in Germany criticise openly
the fact that pseudo-engagement has merely served as a fig leaf excuse
for the legitimisation of research agendas which are still being built
top-down. Instead it will be necessary to supplement the dragged-in
rituals of ‘end of pipe’ dissemination with a fresh paradigm of ‘start
of pipe’ deliberation.

Undoubtedly such initiatives cater to the transparency and true public
engagement pursued by the ideal of Open Science. Thus within the ‘big
picture’ we should embrace the opportunities of the OSC era, and in
particular the interactive online technologies driving it.

## Outlook

Driven by interactive online media, OIC has the potential to exceed the
outdated view of communication as a ‘packaging industry’. In the next
few years we can expect a second wave of professionalisation in science
PR and marketing, e.g. through specialised social media training. The
performance of communication professionals (and probably also the
performance of scientists) will increasingly be measured by whether they
succeed in truly engaging a much wider spectrum of society or not. New
cultures of communication may foster a scientific citizenship but will
also raise new questions regarding imbalances and distortion within the
scientific system, and thus the challenge to measure communication
impact properly, and even normalise and standardise these new
measurements.

## References

Allgaier, J., 2013. Journalism and Social Media as Means of Observing
the Contexts of Science. *BioScience*, 63(4), pp.284–287.

Bader, A., Fritz, G. & Gloning, T., 2012. *Digitale
Wissenschaftskommunikation 2010-2011 Eine Online-Befragung*, Giessen:
Giessener Elektronische Bibliothek. Available at:
<http://geb.uni-giessen.de/geb/volltexte/2012/8539/index.html>.

Bauer, M.W., 2009. The Evolution of Public Understanding of
Science--Discourse and Comparative Evidence. *Science Technology &
Society*, 14(2), pp.221–240. doi:10.1177/097172180901400202.

Brumfiel, G., 2009. Science journalism: Supplanting the old media?
*Nature*, 458(7236), pp.274–277. doi:10.1038/458274a.

Dernbach, B. & Schreiber, P., 2010. Wissenschaft evaluiert.

European Comission, DG Research / DG Communication, 2010. *Special
Eurobarometer*, Available at:
<http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_340_en.pdf>.

Fuller, S., 2010. The mediatisation of science. *BioSocieties*, 5(2),
pp.288–290. doi:10.1057/biosoc.2010.11.

Gerber, A., 2011a. Online Trends from the First German Trend Study on
Science Communication. In Tokar, ed. *Science and the Internet*.
Düsseldorf: Düsseldorf University Press, pp. 13–18. Available at:
<http://bit.ly/SMS_COSCI12>.

Gerber, A., 2013. Open Science without Scientists? Findings from the
Social Media in Science study. Available at: <http://bit.ly/SMS_EISRI>.

Gerber, A., 2011b. *Trendstudie Wissenschaftskommunikation - Vorhang auf
für Phase 5. Chancen, Risiken und Forderungen für die nächste
Entwicklungsstufe der Wissenschaftskommunikation*, Berlin: Innokomm
Forschungszentrum. Available at: <http://stifterverband.de/wk-trends>.

IfD Allensbach, 2011. Markt- und Werbeträger-Analyse (AWA).

Krotz, F., 2007. *Mediatisierung: Fallstudien zum Wandel von
Kommunikation* 1. Aufl., Wiesbaden: VS, Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

Procter, R., Williams, R. & Stewart, J., 2010. *If you build it, will
they come? How researchers perceive and use web 2.0*, Research
Information Network. Available at: <http://www.rin.ac.uk/our-work/>
communicating-and-disseminating-research/
use-and-relevance-web20-researchers.

The Royal Society, 1985. *The Public Understanding of Science*,
Available at:
<http://royalsociety.org/policy/publications/1985/public-understanding-science>.

Trench, B. & Bucchi, M., Science communication, an emerging discipline.
*Journal of Science Communication JCOM*, 9(3). Available at:
<http://jcom.sissa.it/archive/09/03>.

Weingart, P., 2001. *Die Stunde der Wahrheit? Zum Verhältnis der
Wissenschaft zu Politik, Wirtschaft und Medien in der
Wissensgesellschaft* 1. Aufl., Weilerswist: Velbrück Wissenschaft.

